---
title: The Secret 01
series: The Secret 01-21
talk_number: 1
url: https://oshoworld.com/the-secret-01
language: English
duration: 01:45:59
author: SUFISM
scraped_at: 2026-01-03T09:33:02.705953+00:00
---
A man came to Bahauddin Naqshband, and said, “I have traveled from one teacher to another, and I have studied many paths, all of which have given me great benefits and many advantages of all kinds.
“I now wish to be enrolled as one of your disciples, so that I may drink from the well of knowledge, and thus make myself more and more advanced in the tariqa, the mystic way.”
Bahauddin, instead of answering the question directly, called for dinner to be served. When the dish of rice and meat stew was brought, he pressed plateful after plateful upon his guest. Then he gave him fruits and pastries, and then he called for more pulau, and more and more courses of food, vegetables, salads, confitures.
At first the man was flattered, and as Bahauddin showed pleasure at every mouthful he swallowed, he ate as much as he could. When his eating slowed down, the Sufi Sheik seemed very annoyed, and to avoid his displeasure, the unfortunate man ate virtually another meal.
When he could not swallow another grain of rice, and rolled in great discomfort upon a cushion, Bahauddin addressed him in his manner:
“When you came to see me, you were as full of undigested teachings as you now are with meat, rice, and fruit. You felt discomfort, and because you are not accustomed to spiritual discomfort of the real kind, you interpreted this as a hunger for more knowledge. Indigestion was your real condition.
“I can teach you if you will now follow my instructions and stay here with me digesting by means of activities which will not seem to you to be initiatory, but which will be equal to the eating of something which will enable your meal to be digested and transformed into nutrition, not weight.”
The man agreed. He told his story many decades later, when he became famous as the great teacher Sufi Khalil Ashrafzada.
La ilaha il’Allah: there is no god but God. This is the fundamental essence of the way of the Sufis. This is the seed. Out of this seed has grown the bodhi tree of Sufism. In this small proclamation, all that is valuable in all the religions is contained: God is and only God is.
This statement makes God synonymous with existence. God is the very isness of all that is. God is not separate from his creation. The creator is in his creation; there is no duality, there is no distance, so whatever you come across is God. The trees and the rivers and the mountains, all are manifestations of God. You and the people you love, and the people you hate, all are manifestations of God.
This small statement can transform your whole life. It can change the very gestalt of your vision. The moment one recognizes that all is one, love arises on its own accord. And love is Sufism.
Sufism is not concerned with knowledge. Its whole concern is love, intense, passionate love: how to fall in love with the whole, how to be in tune with the whole, how to bridge the distance between the creation and the creator.
The so-called organized religions of the world teach a kind of duality – that the creator is separate from the creation; that the creator is higher than the creation; that there is something wrong with creation, it has to be renounced. Sufis don’t renounce, they rejoice. That’s what I am teaching you here: rejoice!
My sannyas is a way of rejoicing, not a way of renunciation.
Rumi has said:
If you are not one with the beloved,
seek!
And if you are in union,
rejoice!
This assembly is a Sufi assembly. You are my Sufis, the Sufis of the new age. I am introducing you to the world of love. I am initiating you into the ways of love.
Sufis talk about two kinds of love. One they call muhabbat; it means the ordinary love, lukewarm, momentary, partial. One moment it is there, another moment it is gone. It has no depth, no intensity. You call it passion, but it is not passionate. It is not such a flame which can burn you. You don’t become aflame with it; it remains something under your control. You don’t become possessed by it, you don’t lose yourself in it. You remain in control.
The other kind of love, the real love, the authentic love, Sufis call ishq. Ishq means love with total intensity. One is lost in it, one is possessed by it. One goes mad in it.
I have heard…

The great Sufi master Ruzbihan was once on the roof of his khanigah while in a state of wajd. The khanigah is the place where Sufis meet. It is a temple of love. It is a temple of madness, of utter rejoicing. This is a khanigah. No other god than love is worshipped, no other prayer than love is preached. In a khanigah, only those who are becoming aflame with love, who are on the verge of madness are invited.
Ruzbihan was on the roof of his khanigah while in a state of wajd. Wajd is a moment when you are not and God is, a moment of absolute harmony. A window opens and you can see the whole sky, you are no longer confined within the walls of your body and mind. For a moment, lightning happens and all darkness disappears. Wajd is a momentary samadhi, a glimpse, a satori. It comes and goes. Slowly, slowly, it establishes itself.
But even to know God for a moment is of immense beauty and benediction. Even to know for a single moment that you are not separate from existence, that there is no ego, that all is one – la ilaha il’Allah – even to know this just as a passing experience, just like a breeze that comes and is gone… By the time you become aware of it, it is no longer there, but it has been there. It has refreshed you, rejuvenated, resurrected you.
Ruzbihan was on the roof of his khanigah in a state of wajd, in a state of oneness with existence. It happened that a group of young people was passing by in the alley below, playing musical instruments and singing. They were singing:
O heart,
in the neighborhood
of the Beloved
there is no wailing,
nor are the roof, door,
or windows of her house guarded.
If you are ready to lose your soul,
get up and come now, for the field is empty.
They were completely unaware of Ruzbihan. They were just singing. They were even unaware of what they were singing, what they were saying. It is a Sufi provocation, it is a Sufi song. The moment Ruzbihan heard it: “If you are ready to lose your soul, get up and come now, for the field is empty” – and he was in a state of wajd, of unity, oneness, unio mystica – his ecstasy was such that he was not there in that ecstasy at all. When Ruzbihan heard this, something possessed him, something from the beyond, and he flung himself from the roof, whirling and turning in the air, to the ground below.
Upon witnessing this, the group of young people cast away their instruments, left their former ways, entered the khanigah, and became Sufis.

What happened to that group of young people? For the first time, they saw ecstasy, wajd, love, madness for God. For the first time, they came across a man who could risk his very life. This is ishq. Ishq means you are ready to lose your life for your love. Ishq means love has become a higher value than life itself.
Hence the people who are in love are thought to be mad by people who have not known love, are thought to be blind by people who have not seen through the eyes of love. The intellectual condemns the ways of love, he is afraid. Love is dangerous. To go through the heart is risky because the heart is non-calculative, illogical.
Just remember this man, this madman Ruzbihan, jumping from the roof of the khanigah just because a few people were singing a song. They said, “If you are ready to lose your soul, get up and come now, for the field is empty” – and he jumped, without hesitating for a single moment. This is madness. The calculative mind is going to condemn it. But he was not hurt. He was so drunk, he was not even aware of what was happening. Nothing was happening to him because he was not there: as if God jumped through him. He was possessed by God, he was utterly drunk.
Seeing him coming from the roof, turning, whirling in the air… They had seen many dervishes, whirling dervishes, but not a man like this. And when he came onto the ground, he was so innocent, he was so silent, his joy was such that seeing him, just seeing him, was enough for them to renounce their old ways. They threw down their instruments, entered the khanigah, and became Sufis.
That’s how you have become Sufis with me. You have also jumped from your roofs. To become a sannyasin is a quantum leap, it is a non-calculated step. It is only for the mad ones. But God is only for the mad ones. Those who calculate remain part of the marketplace. Calculation keeps you in the world.
One needs to be in such love that one is ready to risk all. That love is called ishq. You have all known muhabbat, the so-called ordinary love, which is just an emotion, a sentiment, superficial. One day you are in love, another day you are in hate. One day you love the person and you are ready to die for the person, and another day you are ready to kill the same person. One moment you are so nice, so beautiful, another moment you are so nasty, so ugly to the same person. This is not ishq. Ishq has depth. This is only circumference. This is just a mask, this is part of your personality. Ishq, passionate love for God, is not of the personality. It is of the essence. It comes from your center. From the very ground of your being, it arises and possesses you. It is not within your control; on the contrary, you are in its control. Yes, you are drunk, and you are mad.
Sufis have found ways and methods of how to create ishq. That is the whole Sufi alchemy: how to create ishq in you, how to create such passion that you can ride on the wave of it, and reach the ultimate.
It is said about Majnu…

The story of Majnu and Laila is a Sufi story, a great love story. No other love story can be compared with it. There are many in the world, almost every country has its own love stories, but nothing compared to Laila and Majnu because it has a Sufi message in it. It is not just an ordinary story of muhabbat, it is the story of ishq.
It is said that Majnu decided one day that, seeing Laila, he had seen all that was worth seeing, so what was the use of keeping his eyes open anymore? He decided that whenever Laila would come he would open his eyes, otherwise he would remain blind because there was nothing else worth seeing.
For months Laila could not come – the parents were against, the society was against – and Majnu waited and waited under the tree where they used to meet, with closed eyes. Days passed, weeks and months passed, and he would not open his eyes.
And the story says God took compassion on him. He came to Majnu and said, “Poor Majnu, open your eyes. I am God himself. You have seen everything in the world, but you have not seen me. Look who is standing before you.”
Majnu is reported to have said, “Get lost. I have decided only to see Laila, nothing else is worth seeing. You may be God, but I am not concerned. Just get lost, don’t disturb me.”
Shocked, God said, “What are you saying? I have never come to anyone on my own. Seekers and devotees pray and search and practice – then too it is very, very difficult to see me – and I have come on my own; you have not even asked for me. I am coming just as a gift, and you are rejecting?”
And Majnu said, “If you really want to be seen by me, come as Laila because I cannot see anything else. Even if I open my eyes I cannot see anything else. I look at a tree and Laila is there. I look at the stars and Laila is there. Laila is in my heart and she has possessed my whole heart, so whatever I see, I see through my heart. I am sorry, but there is no possibility because there is no space left in my heart for anything else. I am sorry. Excuse me, but go away. Don’t disturb me.”

This is ishq. Even God… Yes, even God can be renounced. When you love, when you really love, there are no conditions. It is unconditional. You love for the sheer joy of it. And love is absolute – it knows no wavering, it knows no hesitation.
Sufism is a great experiment in human consciousness: how to transform human consciousness into ishq. It is alchemy.
And this is what I am doing here with you. You may be aware, you may not be aware of it, but this whole experiment is to create in you as much love energy as possible. Man can be transformed into pure love energy. Just as there is atomic energy discovered by physics, and a small atom can explode into tremendous power, each cell of your heart can explode into tremendous love. That love is called ishq. Sufism is the path of love.
Remember that it is a path, it is not a dogma. Mohammedans have a particular word for dogma: they call it shariat. Dogma, doctrine, religion, morality, philosophy, theology, all are contained in shariat. Sufism is not a shariat, it does not depend on books. Sufis are not people of books. Sufism is a tariqat: a methodology, a technique, a science, a path, a way to truth, to haqiqat, to that which is. Remember the difference between shariat and tariqat.
Theology thinks about God. That is the very meaning of theology; it consists of two words, theo and logy: logic about God, contemplation, thinking, philosophizing, speculation about God. Sufism does not think about God because, Sufis say, how can you think about God? Thinking is utterly inadequate. You can think about the world, but you cannot think about God. You can only be in love with God, so it is not a theology, but it is a method. It is an experiment in your consciousness, an experiment to transform it from gross energy into subtle energy, from material energy into divine energy.
Tariqat is the way by which the Sufi comes into harmony with the whole. And two things are the basic requirements to follow this method. One is faqr: faqr means spiritual poverty, simplicity, egolessness. When Jesus says, “Blessed are the poor in spirit,” he is talking exactly about faqr. It does not mean poverty, it means spiritual poverty. Even a king can be spiritually poor, and even a beggar may not be. If the beggar is egoistic he is not spiritually poor, and if the king is egoless he is spiritually poor. Spiritually poor means there is nobody inside; utter emptiness, a silence prevails. This poverty has nothing to do with outer poverty. Outer poverty can be easily imposed; that is not going to help. An inner poverty is needed.
If you follow faqr, if you slowly, slowly dissolve the idea of separation from existence, the ultimate result is fana. Fana means a state of nonbeing, what Buddha calls nirvana. You simply disappear, but your disappearance is the appearance of God. If you are in the state of fana, then suddenly, out of the blue, another state is born; that is called baqa. Baqa means being. Sufism is the bridge between fana and baqa. First you have to be dissolved as an ego, then you are born as God. The dewdrop has to disappear as a dewdrop, into the ocean; this is fana. But the moment the dewdrop falls into the ocean, it becomes the ocean; that is baqa.
Nonbeing is the way to being, and love is the most adequate method to disappear.
That’s why millions of people have decided not to love. If you decide in favor of the ego, you will have to remain loveless. Love and ego cannot go together. Knowledge and ego go together perfectly well, but love and ego cannot go together, not at all. They cannot keep company. They are like darkness and light: if light is there, darkness cannot be. Darkness can only be if light is not there. If love is not there the ego can be, if love is there the ego cannot be. And vice versa, if the ego is dropped, love arrives from all directions. It simply starts pouring in you from everywhere.
Just as nature abhors a vacuum, God also abhors a vacuum. You become a vacuum, and God rushes into you.
The first thing is faqr, and the second thing is zikr. Faqr means spiritual poverty, egolessness, simplicity, dissolving the idea of “I.” And zikr means remembrance. Disappear as a person, then presence is left. In that presence, remember God, let God resound in you – la ilaha il’Allah. Let this remembrance arise in your nothingness. In that purity of nonbeing, let there be only one music heard – la ilaha il’Allah. Repeat it, sway with it, dance with it, twirl, turn, whirl, and let this music fill you. Each cell of your body should start repeating la ilaha il’Allah, la ilaha il’Allah, la ilaha il’Allah.
And you will be surprised; it creates a kind of drunkenness. The very sound of this mantra is such; it is one of the most potential mantras ever invented by man, discovered by man. Just repeating it, you will find that something inside you is becoming psychedelic, something in you is changing. You are becoming light, you are becoming love, you are becoming divine. And not only you will feel it, even others will feel it.
Meditate on these beautiful words of Nurbakhsh:
Those who suffer for you sit waiting for relief. They have renounced themselves, their hearts, and religion. In good faith your lovers have traveled the road of loyalty.
Now sit waiting on your threshold, pure of heart. The beggars sit in the royal court of your grace, hearts content, needs fulfilled. Your dependents, they have nothing to do with worldly kings, but prefer to sit in total poverty within your kingdom.
Worshippers of your wine circle the cask, take up the glass and sit there, no longer questioning, serene. Afflicted, wounded by you, they judge their souls worthless.
Why then should they sit waiting for medicine? In God’s house God’s men cannot sit negligent, like you false pretenders.
Light shines to the highest heavens from the gathering of the Sufis, wild ones, sitting for God, by God, in God.
A very significant statement by a great mystic, Nurbakhsh. He says, wherever Sufis are: “Light shines to the highest heavens from the gathering of the Sufis, wild ones, sitting for God, by God, in God.”
If only God is, then Mansoor was right when he declared: “Ana’l haq” – I am the reality, I am the truth! Then the Upanishads are right when the seers declared: “Aham brahmasmi” – I am the absolute! Buddha is right when he declared: “Not only have I become enlightened, but the moment I became full of light I saw the whole existence as enlightened. I declare the whole existence as enlightened. You may not be aware, but I can see the light in you.”
That’s the function of a master: to see the potential, to see that which can become at any moment actual, and to help to make it actual. You are gods in disguise.
And when I said this is a Sufi assembly, I meant it literally. See this silence, this grace, this benediction that is showering on you? See this stillness? See this faqr? In this moment there is no ego in you, but only a pure silence. The personality has disappeared, there is only presence, and the light rises to the highest heavens. Wherever the wild ones meet, the mad ones meet, wherever there is simplicity and love, and wherever there is prayer, zikr, remembrance of God, this miracle happens. You may not be able to see it. It is happening. You will have to become tuned to this miracle that is happening here.
I am not just teaching you about God. I am not interested in giving you knowledge about God. I am sharing my God with you, it is a sharing. I want to challenge your God, which is asleep inside you, to provoke it. And that is the work Sufis have been doing down the ages, provoking the potential into the actual.
Khwaja Esmat Bokhari says:
This is no Kaaba
for idiots to circle.
Nor a mosque
for the impolite to clamor in.
This is a temple of total ruin.
Inside are the drunk, from pre-eternity
to the Judgment Day,
gone from themselves.
The Sufis call their assemblies “temples of total ruin” – kharabat – because you have to die, you have to disappear. When real Sufis meet, there is nobody to meet. The Sufi assembly is utterly empty of persons. Only God is. It is a kharabat, a temple of ruin. Very revolutionary words of Bokhari: “This is no Kaaba for idiots to circle.”
I also say the same about this assembly: “This is no Kaaba for idiots to circle” – hence idiots are very angry with me – “nor a mosque for the impolite to clamor in.” This is not a place for the mob and the crowd. This is a place only for the chosen ones, only for those who are ready to die in their love, only for those who are ready to risk all in their search for God.
This is a temple of total ruin – kharabat. If you come close to me, remember: you are going to die.
Mohammed has said, “Die before you die.” That is a Sufi statement: die before you die. Death is coming, death will take you away, but that will not be a voluntary death. It will not be a surrender. You will be forced to die. A Sufi dies voluntarily, he dies in love. He does not wait for death to come, love is enough to die in. And to die in love is beautiful because to die in love is to go beyond death. Listen to Mohammed: “Die before you die.”
If you can die here with me… I am a dead man. I have died. And all that I am teaching you is an art of dying so that you can move into the state of fana: you disappear. If you fulfill that condition of disappearing, God immediately rewards you with baqa – being descends in you – and that being is eternal.
The door that you have to pass through is the door of love because only a lover is ready to die voluntarily. Nobody else can die voluntarily, only a lover – because the lover knows that death is not death, but the beginning of an eternal pilgrimage.
We are not creating a Kaaba here for idiots to circle, not a mosque for mobs to clamor in. We are creating a scientific energy field, where your energies can be transformed into their optimum potential. When a man is really aflame with love, God has happened. Only with the happening of God can you be contented, and can you be blissful. Only with the happening of God does misery disappear, and do hells become nonexistent.
God is already the case! But you have not been able to gather courage enough to die in love. Sufism will persuade you, will seduce you to die in love.
A Sufi mystic says:
l thought of you so often
that I completely became you.
Little by little you drew near,
and slowly but slowly I passed away.
If you remember God… And to remember God means to see God in the trees and the birds and the people and the animals. Wherever life is, look for God, wherever existence is, search for God because only God is – la ilaha il’Allah. So he can be found anywhere. He has to be found everywhere. Don’t look for God as a person, otherwise you will go on missing.
That’s why millions of people search for God but go on missing. They are searching for a certain image. God has no image, God is not a person. God is this wholeness, this totality. So don’t start looking for a certain personage, otherwise you will never find him – and not finding him, you will start thinking there is no God. You started from a wrong vision.
Because God has been thought of as a person, there are so many atheists in the world. The atheists are there because of your so-called religious people. The so-called religious people talk about God as if God is a person, and they cannot prove him. They create a climate in which atheism naturally flowers. Almost half of the earth has become atheist. All the communists are atheists, and the remaining people are only so-called religious, they are ready to turn to atheism any moment.
Do you know? Before the Russian revolution, Russia was one of the most religious countries of the world. It was as religious as India is. And just after the revolution, within five years, all religions simply disappeared. What kind of religion was this, which took only five years to disappear? And when the atheists came into power, people simply surrendered to atheism. That religion was false, it was pseudo.
The same is going to happen in India. Any day this country will become irreligious; just let the irreligious people come into power, and all the temples and all the gurdwaras and all the mosques will start disappearing because this religion is not real religion.
In fact, the very idea of God as a person creates doubts in you. How many hands has he? What kind of face? Is he black or white? Does he look like a Chinese or an American? What height? Old or young? Man or woman? How many faces has he? A thousand and one questions, and not a single question is answerable – because you have taken the very first thing wrongly. God is not a person at all. God is this impersonal existence.
Keep this continuously in your heart – in Sufism, God is synonymous with existence, synonymous with isness; the suchness of existence is God – and then things will become easier for you to understand.
Now the story:
A man came to Bahauddin Naqshband, and said, “I have traveled from one teacher to another, and I have studied many paths, all of which have given me great benefits and many advantages of all kinds.”
Bahauddin is one of the greatest Sufi masters ever. He is of the same status as Buddha, Krishna, Mohammed, Christ. Naqshband means “a designer”; he was a designer, and this story is a design. He used to create situations because people can only be taught through real situations. And he was one of the greatest designers.
Gurdjieff learned his devices from the Order of Naqshbandis, the followers of Bahauddin Naqshband. They are still called Naqshbandis: “The Designers.” No other school of human transformation has created so many devices. Bahauddin used to say that people are so asleep that if you simply talk with them they will listen, and yet they will not listen. They will only hear, and they will not listen. And even if they hear, the meaning that they will give to you and your words will be their own. They have to be brought to actual situations. People are so asleep, they have to be hit by actual realities; only then can something penetrate their thick, dense, insensitive, unintelligent heads.
A man came to Bahauddin Naqshband, and said, “I have traveled from one teacher to another…” There are many people who go on traveling from one teacher to another, from one philosophy to another philosophy, from one school to another school, and these people think they are gathering much knowledge. They are gathering just rubbish. Knowledge cannot be attained in this way. A rolling stone gathers no moss. A spiritual seeker has to be in an intimate love relationship with a master. It is a delicate phenomenon, it takes time. You cannot just go from one door to another; you will remain a beggar. Yes, you can collect some information, but all that information inside you will become chaotic because each school has its own methods, and those methods are perfectly right in that school, in that particular milieu. They have been designed by masters, there is a pattern which has to be followed. Those methods cannot be mixed by other methods, with other methods.
If a person goes from one teacher to another teacher thinking that this way he is going to accumulate much knowledge, he will go neurotic because all those methods are right in their own context, but without the context they are dangerous. And the context exists with the master because only the master is fully aware of what is being done.
A few people come here, and they will watch and they will try to collect a few fragments, and then they think they will try on their own. They are doing something very dangerous. I would like them to be alert, to beware: these methods can be dangerous without the context. The context exists in me, and the context exists here in the total situation that is being created. You have to be here to know something which can be beneficial. And you have to be very, very patient because these things cannot be delivered to you like goods, and these things take time.
The love that exists between a master and a disciple is not like a seasonal flower. That love needs long, long periods of intimacy. The disciple needs to be in immediate contact with the master as long as possible. Only then slowly, slowly something dawns on his consciousness; slowly, slowly a ray starts penetrating him.
Now, this man is like almost all so-called seekers. “I have traveled” – he said to Bahauddin Naqshband – “from one teacher to another, and I have studied many paths.” Now this is foolish, this is utterly foolish. You need not study many paths, one path is enough to follow. Why waste time studying paths? Follow, travel. If you want to go to the Himalayas you don’t study all kinds of roads, you simply choose one and you follow it. Why waste time? Life is very short. Nobody knows, tomorrow may be the end. One cannot go on throwing time and energy into unnecessary things.
If you come across a master and you feel, “Yes, this is my home,” then be drowned. Then forget that any other methods exist, that any other paths exist. Then let love possess you. Only then, slowly, slowly, patiently waiting, something starts growing.
It is like a child growing in the womb. If the mother is not ready to wait for nine months, the child will not grow. And the child that grows between a master and the disciple may take more than nine months – nine years, ninety years? One never knows because with each disciple it is going to be different. It depends on the pace of the disciple.
But this man is a representative of the so-called seekers. They go from one teacher to another, studying all paths.
“…all of which have given me great benefits,” – he said – “and many advantages of all kinds.” That is all nonsense, that is just consolation. You are collecting dregs. You are begging, and a few pieces from here and a few pieces from there, just dregs. You have never been an invited guest to any master’s world. And one has to earn it, to become an invited guest to a master’s table. One has to pay for it, it is not cheap.
People come here also. They do one group and they are finished. They say they have learned, and now they are going somewhere else. For two, three days they have done meditations, and they think that they have known what meditation is. Now they will go somewhere else to learn some other methods. These are stupid people.
And these people create neuroses for themselves and for others too – because when they start gathering too much, they start advising others. Sooner or later these kinds of people become teachers on their own. The world is in too much of a chaos because of false teachers. And who is a false teacher? The false teacher is one who went from one teacher to another, never stayed anywhere, never got rooted in any path, but has gathered much information, has become knowledgeable. Now he can teach. All that he teaches is gibberish, but he can enjoy teaching it, it is very ego-fulfilling. He is the knower, and the other is ignorant. It is very gratifying.
Beware of these pitfalls, they are on every seeker’s path. And one can always convince oneself that many have been the benefits, many advantages. Man’s ego is such that he cannot confess that he has been foolish.

Just a few days ago, a man took sannyas. He is a Jaina, has followed Jaina monks for many years. He is an old man. After taking sannyas, he asked, “Should I start your meditations, or can I continue my meditation that I have been doing for at least thirty years?” I looked into the man; there was not even a trace of meditation.
I asked him, “How have those meditations been? Have they been of some help, have you been growing through them? Have you become silent, blissful, contented? Are you fulfilled? Has some light penetrated you through those meditations? Have you become aware of that which is?”
He said, “Yes. They have been of great benefit. I have learned much, I have grown through them.”
So I said, “Then it is okay, continue your old meditations. There is no need. But why have you taken sannyas?”
He said, “I thought maybe something more, or maybe something is missed, although I have been doing perfectly well on my own, but maybe something more can be gathered.”
I said, “Continue with your old meditations. Ask only when you see that they have not given you anything. I will not tell you to do my meditations before that.”
And the next day he wrote a letter: “I am sorry. I could not sleep the whole night. What a fool I am. Nothing has happened. And how was it that I could say in front of you, ‘Yes, much has happened’? I was thinking,” he wrote, “that even if I say that much has happened, you would still say to me to do your meditations, but you simply said okay, then continue. Then I pondered over it. I went back, looked into my past, and those thirty years have been a wastage. Really, that’s why I have come to you to take sannyas. But my ego would not permit me to say that I have been stupid continuously for thirty years, doing some unnecessary things, meaningless things.”

This has been happening to many people. Whenever people who have been doing something in their past come, they always pretend that much has happened. It is so difficult for the ego to confess.
But when you come to a master you have to be true. If you are not true to your own master, where else are you going to be true? And how can the master help you if you are untrue? I could see that the man was almost a desert. Not even a single flower had bloomed in him, he had not known anything of the spring, but still he said what he said.
Watch. This man is in everybody. This ego is hiding in everybody’s being. It goes on pretending.
This man said, “Yes, many kinds of benefits and advantages have happened…”
“I now wish to be enrolled as one of your disciples, so that I may drink from the well of knowledge, and thus make myself more and more advanced in the tariqa, the mystic way.”
Bahauddin, instead of answering the question directly, called for dinner to be served.
This is a design. In the modern age, Gurdjieff designed many things, exactly on the same lines as Bahauddin. The people who are not aware of the designs of a master will not be able to understand at all.
For example, a man would come to Gurdjieff who has never eaten meat, and Gurdjieff would force him to eat meat. Now, just think of a vegetarian. He would simply escape; he would ask, “What kind of religion is this?”
But by giving you meat, Gurdjieff wants to disturb your whole status quo, your whole chemistry because only in a disturbed state can your reality be known; otherwise you are too cunning. If a nonvegetarian comes to Gurdjieff, he will say, “Wait. For thirty days be a vegetarian, and then for three days fast, and then I will start to work on you.” Gurdjieff is neither for vegetarianism nor against; he is a designer.
He would give parties for his disciples, particularly to new disciples, and would prepare many kinds of foods, and then all kinds of alcoholic beverages. And this would continue almost to the middle of the night, eating and drinking. And when everybody was utterly unconscious, then he would watch. Then he would sit silently, would go to people and watch – because people are so cunning that unless they are drowned in a drug, they will not reveal their truth.
The man who was just pretending to be a celibate, when he was drunk, started to flirt with the woman who was sitting by his side. He was a celibate, and he was pretending that he was a monk and he had remained celibate – he was a brahmachari – but once he was drowned in alcohol, he forgot all celibacy, all brahmacharya. His reality surfaced.
The woman who was pretending to be very elegant, ladylike, sophisticated, cultured, holier-than-thou, far above ordinary human beings… Once she was under the impact of alcohol, she was just the opposite; she started to behave almost like a prostitute.
Gurdjieff would watch his disciples only when they were unconscious. And once he knew their situation, then he knew. Then he would not bother with what they said, he would start working on what they were.
Bahauddin, instead of answering the question directly, called for dinner to be served. This is one of the Sufi methodologies: they never answer directly. Their work is indirect because you have become so cunning that there is no way to change you directly. You have to be hit from the back door.
When the dish of rice and meat stew was brought, he pressed plateful after plateful upon his guest. Then he gave him fruits and pastries, and then he called for more pulau, and more and more courses of food, vegetables, salads, confitures.
At first the man was flattered…
That’s what happens when you start gathering knowledge: you are flattered, you start thinking that now you know, you become very, very egoistic. You don’t know a thing, but the knowledge that you have gathered gives you a false impression, as if you know. And slowly, slowly you forget that “as if” completely, you become knowledgeable. You start pretending to others and finally to yourself. You deceive others in the beginning, and then you are deceived by the impression that you create in others. When others start thinking that you know, you start believing it. How can so many people be wrong? If so many people think that you know, you must be knowing. Alone you may have doubts, but when you gather many disciples, the doubts disappear. “So many people believe in me, I must be right.” First deceive others, and then be deceived by those who are deceived by you. It is a mutual arrangement.
At first the man was flattered, and as Bahauddin showed pleasure at every mouthful he swallowed…
Bahauddin was creating a perfect situation. That’s what happens if you go to the so-called teachers. They will be very happy when they see that you have started learning, that you have started repeating like parrots; they will be very happy. When they see that you are repeating them, they will be gratified, their egos will be more fulfilled. Then they have many people who have become “his master’s voice,” who have become imitators.
They will be very happy, just as parents are happy when they see their children are growing to look just like them. If somebody says, “Your boy looks just like you,” the father is gratified. He may be stupid and the boy may look stupid and just like him, but that is not the question. He is very gratified that he will not leave the world alone. He will leave this child in the world to remind it that he has been here; he is going to leave a signature on the world. And every parent tries to mold the child in just his own image. Down the ages that’s what parents have been doing with children.
Children are the most exploited class in the world, and utterly helpless. There seems to be no way to help them to get out from the imprisonment that parents create for them in the name of love, in the name of the children’s welfare, for their future. And all that is being done is that the parents are trying to leave replicas in the world, imitators in the world. That is what their parents had done to them, and so on, so forth. It must go back to Adam and Eve; they created children in their own image. The Bible says God created man in his own image. He is the father, he must have created children in his own image. Then Adam and Eve must have created in their own image, and it has gone on and on.
So you are not only a carbon copy. You are a carbon copy of carbon copies, of carbon copies. The original seems never to have existed.
Then it is no wonder if you are in misery because only an original person can be in bliss – because truth brings bliss. You are false.
But a teacher will be very happy when he looks at his disciples and they start repeating what he is saying. He pats them. That’s what Naqshband was doing with this poor man.
At first the man was flattered, and as Bahauddin showed pleasure at every mouthful he swallowed, he ate as much as he could.
And just to satisfy the so-called teachers, people go on accumulating knowledge as much as they can.
When his eating slowed down…
But there is a limit to everything.
…the Sufi Sheik seemed very annoyed…
That’s what happens with teachers. They are happy only up to the point you are swallowing, repeating. When you are really fed up, literally fed up, and you are too full and on the verge of vomiting, they start becoming annoyed: “So you have stopped growing.” And then out of fear, out of their annoyance, out of their anger, you will try a little more, whatever you can manage.
…the Sufi Sheik seemed very annoyed, and to avoid his displeasure, the unfortunate man ate virtually another meal.
When he could not swallow another grain of rice, and rolled in great discomfort upon a cushion, Bahauddin addressed him in this manner…
Now he has created the perfect situation. Now even the most mediocre mind will be able to see the point.
“When you came to see me, you were as full of undigested teachings as you now are with meat, rice, and fruit. You felt discomfort, and because you are unaccustomed to spiritual discomfort of the real kind, you interpreted this as a hunger for more knowledge. Indigestion was your real condition.”
Now he has created a condition to hit the point deep into the heart. He has hammered this situation. He has created the exact situation in which the man was, but only now can he understand. It could have been said, but then he would not have understood.
Let me remind you of a Zen story. The paths of Zen and the Sufis are not very different. Their methods are different, but their working is very similar. Zen masters also create situations; of course, their path is of meditation, not of love, and Sufism is the path of love, not meditation. But let me add one thing more, otherwise you will misunderstand.
If you follow the path of meditation, love comes as a shadow, and if you follow the path of love, meditation comes as a shadow. They are always together; if you can manage one, the other has been managed without managing it. But as far as devices, designs are concerned, Sufis and Zen masters are alike.

A professor of philosophy went to a Zen master, Nan-in, and he asked about God, about nirvana, about meditation, and so many things, and the master listened silently – questions and questions and questions.
Then he said, “You look tired. You have climbed this high mountain; you have come from a faraway place. Let me first serve you tea.” And the Zen master made tea.
The professor waited. He was boiling with questions.
And when the master was making tea and the samovar was singing and the aroma of the tea started spreading, the master said to the professor, “Wait, don’t be in such a hurry. Who knows? Even by drinking tea your questions may be answered – or even before that.”
The professor was at a loss. He started thinking, “This whole journey has been a waste. This man seems to be mad. How can my question about God be answered by drinking tea? What relevance is there? This man is a madman. And it is better to escape from here as soon as possible because who knows how and what he is going to do next. And he says, ‘Even before that, who knows, your questions may be answered.’”
And that’s how it happened. The professor could not escape either because he was also feeling tired, and it was good to have a cup of tea before he started descending the mountain.
The master brought the kettle, poured tea in the cup, and went on pouring. The cup was full, and the tea started overflowing in the saucer, but he went on pouring. Then the saucer was also full – just one drop more and the tea would start flowing onto the floor – and the professor said, “Stop! What are you doing? Are you mad or something? Can’t you see the cup is full? Can’t you see the saucer is full?”
The Zen master said, “That’s the exact situation you are in. Your mind is so full of questions that even if I answer, you don’t have any space for the answer to go in. But you look like an intelligent man. You could see the point, that now even a single drop more of tea and it would not be contained by the cup or the saucer; it would start overflowing onto the floor. And I tell you, since you entered this house, your questions are over-pouring onto the floor, overflowing all over the place. This small hut is full of your questions. Go back, empty your cup, and then come. First create a little space in you.”

To create space is meditation. The master had created a perfect situation.
Bahauddin has done it in a similar way. He says, “You were in great discomfort, exactly like the discomfort that you are suffering from now, but you thought that discomfort was there because of your spiritual thirst. You were suffering, but you thought that suffering was just because you wanted more knowledge, that you were suffering because you didn’t have enough knowledge.
“You were suffering because you already had more than enough! You were suffering from overburdening, you were suffering from undigested knowledge. But you thought your suffering was because you needed more knowledge and you didn’t have enough, hence the suffering. You misunderstood your discomfort.
“This is exactly your situation. Now the situation is in the body, but it has been in your inner being for many years, maybe your whole life. You have suffered from indigestion.”
Remember, knowledge has also to be digested. Only then does it become wisdom. If you go on eating and you cannot digest it, it will not become your blood, your bones, it will not become your marrow. It will become a problem. You will gather weight; you will become heavy, dull. You will not become more intelligent through it, you will become more stupid. You will lose awareness, you will become more unconscious. You will become more like a rock. You will become stagnant. You will lose your flow.
“Indigestion…
said Bahauddin,
“…was your real condition.
“I can teach you if you will now follow my instructions and stay here with me digesting by means of activities which will not seem to you to be initiatory, but which will be equal to the eating of something which will enable your meal to be digested and transformed into nutrition, not weight.“
Eating is right if it gives you nourishment. It is wrong if it only gives you weight. Eating is right if it gives you vitality, eating is wrong if it just makes you heavy. It is meaningless. To be heavy is not to be vital. The vital person is not heavy, he is light, he is almost weightless. He moves on the earth, but his feet never touch the earth. He can fly any moment. Gravitation has no effect on him.
Bahauddin is saying, “But you will have to fulfill a few things, only then can I teach you.” A real master can teach you only if you fulfill certain conditions. On your part that shows that you are ready to receive.
Many people ask me, “Why can’t we be here without being sannyasins, and learn?” I say, “You can be here, and whatever you can learn you can learn, but unless you are an insider you will not be able to receive the grace that I am making available to you.” By being a sannyasin you simply show a gesture: “My doors are open for you. I am ready to become a host for your energy. Come and be my guest.” That’s what sannyas is, and that’s what a Sufi needs to be.
“I can teach you if you will now follow my instructions and stay here with me…” Now, there are many people here also…
Just a few days ago, a sannyasin came and he asked, “What groups should I do?” and I suggested some. He dropped out of the first group. He thought that I had not understood his real condition, that I had given him a wrong group: “This is not for me.” I had given him two other groups. He never went – because if the first was wrong, naturally the other two were also going to be wrong. Then he inquired, “What should I do? Because I feel the groups that you have given me are wrong. Can I choose my own groups?” I said, “Okay, you can choose your own groups.”
Now he has chosen his own groups, but he is disconnected from me. Now he is alone. He is a sannyasin, but only on the surface.
Yes, I gave him the first group knowing perfectly well that it was not for him. But that’s what the design was. Can he trust me, just for three days being in a group? Can he trust me? Yes, it was true that the group was not meant for him. It was just something to create a situation. The situation was that he started feeling discomfort in the group, and could not tolerate it even for three days – could not even trust me for three days. Had he trusted, he would have shown that he was a real disciple.
Now, he is a sannyasin, but just because he is in orange clothes and has a mala. The contact with me is no longer there. I cannot find him, his doors are closed. Now he will be here but without me, and all that he will do he could have done anywhere else. Now he wants to do the Encounter group. He could have done Encounter anywhere else.
If he is not with me he will not be available to Teertha’s energy either because Teertha, the Encounter group leader, has no other energy. He simply functions as my energy. He is in that state where he has become just a vehicle. He is no more. He is in the state of fana, the disciple has disappeared in him. Now he simply functions as me. His hands are my hands, his energy is my energy. He is just a passage. If this sannyasin is not available to me, he will not be available to Teertha either.
You could have done an Encounter group in the United States, in England, in Europe, anywhere. You will miss the special quality of the Encounter group that is available here. It is a totally different phenomenon that is happening here. This Encounter group is not led by a group leader, the group leader does not exist. He is just a functionary, just a hollow bamboo. It is my song that filters through him to you.
There is no need to come here if you cannot follow my instructions. And these are small instructions. If I send you into some more difficult task you will escape. You could not just do a three-day Intensive Enlightenment group. What kind of search is this? You don’t have any passion for truth, and you don’t have any understanding of the workings of a master.
Do you see this chair I am sitting on? Just four days ago, I ordered Asheesh and Veena to prepare it specially for the Sufi lectures. They have worked day and night. They could complete the chair only at one o’clock in the night, just a few hours ago. They could have thought, “Why could he not have said so a few days before, why just four days before?” But they enjoyed it, they understood the design. And they went higher and higher in energy. Last night when they completed the chair, they were almost on a psychedelic trip! As they moved in surrender… It was difficult to complete it in four days, but they did.
The chair was not the question at all. It was a naqshbandi, it was a design. They learned something out of it: if you surrender, you can go high. The deeper you go in surrender, the higher you go in consciousness. They could have said that it was not possible. They would have missed – and they would have never known what it was meant for. But I am happy that Asheesh and Veena both understood the point. They went into it in deep trust; they thought that when I said four days, then it must be possible, and they poured their total energy into it.
When you pour your total energy into anything in trust, it becomes meditation. It brings ecstasy. Last night they must have moved into a kind of wajd, a glimpse.
When you are with a master you have to be very, very conscious because each and every thing is managed in such a way that it helps your spiritual growth.
“I can teach you if you will now follow my instructions…” – said Bahauddin – “and stay here with me digesting, by means of activities which will not seem to you to be initiatory…” And many times… For example, how is preparing a chair concerned with sannyas? And how is it concerned with meditation? Can’t I speak on Sufism on another chair? We have many chairs. How is it concerned with Sufism? If you think about it, it is utterly irrelevant. But that is not the point at all. If you think that way, you will miss the whole point.
Bahauddin says, “You may not understand that what I am saying to do is initiatory in any way.” “…but which will be equal to the eating of something which will enable your meal to be digested and transformed into nutrition, not weight.”
If you are suffering from indigestion, just a tablet that can help digestion… It may not appear to you how it is going to help because you don’t understand the inner chemistry of the body. But you have to follow the instruction of the master. That’s what trust is all about. And sometimes masters ask impossible things, but blessed are those who can go into even impossible things. The more impossible a thing is, the greater is going to be your maturity through it, attainment through it, enlightenment through it.
The whole point is that the food should become nutrition, nourishment, not weight. Whatever the master is giving you has to become wisdom, not knowledge. Knowledge is weight, wisdom is nourishment. Knowledge is intellectual, your memory is just overflowing with information. Wisdom is not part of your memory, wisdom becomes spread all over your being. You need not remember your wisdom; knowledge has to be remembered. Wisdom need not be remembered at all, it is you. Knowledge remains separate; if you don’t remember, you will forget. Wisdom you cannot forget, it is you. Remembrance is not needed, hence it never creates weight.
When Buddha speaks it is not a weight on him. When I am speaking to you it is not a weight on me. No effort is there, it is utterly effortless. It is a sharing. I am not trying to teach you something, but simply overflowing toward you.
Wisdom is natural, like digested food which has become your vitality. Knowledge is unnatural, is destructive, like undigested food which is hanging, burdening your chemistry.
The man agreed. He told his story many decades later, when he became famous as the great teacher Sufi Khalil Ashrafzada.
He himself became a great master in his own time, but he could become that only because he agreed. The same I say to you: if you agree with me, sooner or later great light will be released from you. You will become a light unto yourself and not only unto yourself, but for others also. You will become a lighthouse for all those who are wandering in darkness. But the first requirement is agreement with me with no hesitation, with no condition from your side, an unconditional trust. Then this miracle is possible in your life too.
La ilaha il’Allah.
Enough for today.

============================================================

The first question:
Osho,
Why is love so painful?
Love is painful because it creates the way for bliss. Love is painful because it transforms, love is mutation. Each transformation is going to be painful because the old has to be left for the new. The old is familiar, secure, safe, the new is absolutely unknown. You will be moving in an uncharted ocean. You cannot use your mind with the new; with the old, the mind is skillful. The mind can function only with the old; with the new, the mind is utterly useless.
Hence, fear arises, and leaving the old, comfortable, safe world, the world of convenience, pain arises. It is the same pain that the child feels when he comes out of the mother’s womb. It is the same pain that the bird feels when he comes out of the egg. It is the same pain that the bird will feel when he tries to be on the wing for the first time.
The fear of the unknown – and the security of the known – the insecurity of the unknown, the unpredictability of the unknown, makes one very frightened.
And because the transformation is going to be from the self toward a state of no-self, the agony is very deep. But you cannot have ecstasy without going through agony. If gold wants to be purified, it has to pass through fire. Love is fire.
It is because of the pain of love that millions of people live a loveless life. They too suffer, and their suffering is futile. To suffer in love is not to suffer in vain. To suffer in love is creative, it takes you to higher levels of consciousness. To suffer without love is utterly a waste; it leads you nowhere, it keeps you moving in the same vicious circle.
The man who is without love is narcissistic, he is closed. He knows only himself. And how much can he know himself if he has not known the other? – because only the other can function as a mirror. You will never know yourself without knowing the other. Love is fundamental for self-knowledge too. The person who has not known the other in deep love, in intense passion, in utter ecstasy, will not be able to know who he is because he will not have a mirror to see his own reflection.
Relationship is a mirror, and the purer the love is, the higher the love is, the better the mirror, the cleaner the mirror. But higher love needs you to be open. Higher love needs you to be vulnerable. You have to drop your armor; that is painful. You have not to be constantly on guard. You have to drop the calculating mind. You have to risk. You have to live dangerously. The other can hurt you; that is the fear in being vulnerable. The other can reject you; that is the fear in being in love.
The reflection that you find of your own self in the other may be ugly; that is the anxiety. Avoid the mirror – but by avoiding the mirror you are not going to become beautiful. By avoiding the situation you are not going to grow either. The challenge has to be taken.
One has to go into love. That is the first step toward godliness, and it cannot be bypassed. Those who try to bypass the step of love will never reach godliness. That is absolutely necessary – because you become aware of your totality only when you are provoked by the presence of the other; when your presence is enhanced by the presence of the other; when you are brought out of your narcissistic, closed world under the open sky.
Love is an open sky. To be in love is to be on the wing. But certainly, the unbounded sky creates fear.
To drop the ego is very painful because we have been taught to cultivate the ego. We think the ego is our only treasure. We have been protecting it, we have been decorating it, we have been continuously polishing it – and when love knocks on the door, all that is needed to fall in love is to put aside the ego. It is certainly painful. It is your whole life’s work, it is all that you have created – this ugly ego, this idea that “I am separate from existence.”
This idea is ugly because it is untrue. This idea is illusory, but our society exists and is based on the idea that each person is a person, not a presence. The truth is that there is no person at all in the world, there is only presence. You are not – not as an ego, separate from the whole. You are part of the whole. The whole penetrates you, the whole breathes in you, pulsates in you, the whole is your life.
Love gives you the first experience of being in tune with something that is not your ego. Love gives you the first lesson that you can fall into harmony with someone who has never been part of your ego. If you can be in harmony with a woman, if you can be in harmony with a friend, with a man, if you can be in harmony with your child or with your mother, why can’t you be in harmony with all human beings? And if to be in harmony with a single person gives such joy, what will be the outcome if you are in harmony with all human beings? And if you can be in harmony with all human beings, why can’t you be in harmony with animals and birds and trees? Then one step leads to another.
Love is a ladder. It starts with one person, it ends with the totality. Love is the beginning, godliness is the end. To be afraid of love, to be afraid of the growing pains of love, is to remain enclosed in a dark cell.
Modern man is living in a dark cell; it is narcissistic. Narcissism is the greatest obsession of the modern mind – and then there are problems, problems which are meaningless. There are problems which are creative because they lead you to higher awareness. There are problems which lead you nowhere, they simply keep you tethered, they simply keep you in your old mess.
Love creates problems. You can avoid those problems by avoiding love. But those are very essential problems. They have to be faced, encountered; they have to be lived and gone through, and gone beyond. And to go beyond, the way is through. Love is the only real thing worth doing. All else is secondary. If it helps love, it is good. All else is just a means, love is the end. So whatever the pain, go into love.
If you don’t go into love, as many people have decided, you are stuck with yourself. Then your life is not a pilgrimage, then your life is not a river going to the ocean; your life is a stagnant pool, dirty, and soon there will be nothing but dirt and mud. To keep clean, one needs to keep flowing. A river remains clean because it goes on flowing. Flow is the process of remaining continuously virgin.
A lover remains a virgin. All lovers are virgin. The people who don’t love cannot remain virgin. They become dormant, stagnant; they start stinking sooner or later – and sooner than later – because they have nowhere to go. Their life is dead.
That’s where modern man finds himself, and because of this, all kinds of neuroses, all kinds of madnesses, have become rampant. Psychological illness has taken epidemic proportions. It is no longer that a few individuals are psychologically ill. The reality is, the whole earth has become a madhouse. The whole of humanity is suffering from a kind of neurosis.
And that neurosis is coming from your narcissistic stagnancy. Everyone is stuck with their own illusion of having a separate self. Then people go mad, and this madness is meaningless, unproductive, uncreative. Or people start committing suicide. Those suicides are also unproductive, uncreative.
You may not commit suicide by taking poison, or jumping from a cliff, or by shooting yourself, but you can commit a suicide which is a very slow process, and that’s what happens. Very few people commit suicide suddenly. Others have decided for a slow suicide; gradually, slowly, slowly they die. But the tendency to be suicidal has become almost universal.
This is no way to live, and the reason, the fundamental reason, is we have forgotten the language of love. We are no longer courageous enough to go into that adventure called love.
Hence, people are interested in sex because sex is not risky. It is momentary, you don’t get involved. Love is involvement, it is commitment. It is not momentary. Once it takes roots, it can be forever. It can be a lifelong involvement. Love needs intimacy, and only when you are intimate does the other become a mirror. When you meet sexually with a woman or a man, you do not meet at all; in fact, you avoid the soul of the other person. You just use the body and escape, and the other uses your body and escapes. You never become intimate enough to reveal each other’s original faces.
Love is the greatest Zen koan. It is painful, but don’t avoid it. If you avoid it, you have avoided the greatest opportunity to grow. Go into it, suffer love because through the suffering comes great ecstasy. Yes, there is agony, but out of the agony, ecstasy is born. Yes, you will have to die as an ego, but if you can die as an ego, you will be born as a god, as a buddha. And love will give you the first tongue-tip taste of Tao, of Sufism, of Zen. Love will give you the first proof that God is, that life is not meaningless.
The people who say life is meaningless are people who have not known love. All that they are saying is that their life has missed love.
Let there be pain, let there be suffering. Go through the dark night, and you will reach a beautiful sunrise. It is only in the womb of the dark night that the sun evolves. It is only through the dark night that the morning comes.
My whole approach here is that of love. I teach only love and nothing else. You can forget about God, that is just an empty word. You can forget about prayers because they are only rituals imposed by others on you. Love is the natural prayer, not imposed by anybody. You are born with it. Love is the true God – not the God of the theologians, but the God of Buddha, Jesus, Mohammed, the God of the Sufis. Love is a tariqa, a method, to kill you as a separate individual and to help you become the infinite. Disappear as a dewdrop and become the ocean, but you will have to pass through the door of love.
And certainly when one starts disappearing like a dewdrop, and one has lived long as a dewdrop, it hurts – because one has been thinking, “I am this, and now this is going. I am dying.” You are not dying, only an illusion is dying. You have become identified with the illusion, true, but the illusion is still an illusion. Only when the illusion is gone will you be able to see who you are. And that revelation brings you to the ultimate peak of joy, bliss, celebration.

The second question:
Osho,
Did the real master Jesus, the one beyond all the Christian distortions, to whom I once opened my heart, did he send me to you?
All the way back this time, tentative and unsure, I come to you. I would hold this mala and look at your picture and you would say to me, using Jesus' words, “Come unto me ye who labor and are heavy laden and I will give you rest, for my yoke is easy and my burden light.”
I was surprised by such happiness to be before you in darshan and was transported by the eternal now of your presence. Yet underneath, somewhere I have held back. I have a bitter hatred toward false teachers and have been afraid to be duped again.
I come cluttered with my fear, doubt, pride, rebellion, guilt and wrath which erupts even at you. I come with the hard growth you have fostered in me.
Osho, I long to trust and surrender, somehow knowing it is the best way for coming home totally, to you, to myself, to Jesus, to the universe.
Alok, neither have I spoken to you nor has Jesus. It is only your Christian conditioning. You don’t know a thing about Jesus; you can’t know.
And to come to me through Jesus is not to come to me. If Jesus remains between me and you, there will be no connection, no contact, no communion. If you understand me, then there is no distinction between me and Jesus, so why go on carrying this Jesus of your mind? This is just your past speaking to you, and you are trying to hide your past behind a beautiful name, Jesus. You don’t know a thing about Jesus.
I am here, you are with me, and you cannot understand me. How can you understand a Jesus? The gap between you and Jesus is that of two thousand years. All that you know about Jesus is what you have been taught. Although you say that you don’t believe in the Jesus that has been given to you by the Christians… But what other Jesus do you know? If there had not been a Christian church, you would not even have heard of Jesus. All that you know about Jesus you know through the Christian propaganda.
I am here confronting you, and still you are keeping a curtain between me and you. Now you call that curtain Jesus.
Your question is relevant to many people. It is not only that wrong things can become barriers between a master and a disciple; so-called good things, beautiful things, can become even far stronger barriers between the master and the disciple. In fact, only the good things can be the barriers – because you cannot think of them as barriers.
You ask, “Did the real master Jesus…?” What do you know about the real and the unreal Jesus? And how are you going to make a distinction between the real and the unreal? You will make the distinction – and you are living in darkness, you are groping in darkness. Out of your confusion, whatever you decide is going to be more confusion and nothing else. Who is going to decide what is real and what is unreal? You, Alok? That is sacrilegious.
That’s what the Jews were doing when they crucified Jesus. They were deciding, and they decided, “He is not the real Christ. He is not the messiah we have been waiting for.” How are you going to decide?
Now, Alok has two conditionings in his mind: one is Christian, the other is Communist. Now, Christians are dangerous, Communists are dangerous – Alok is doubly dangerous. He will have a concept of Jesus which is in tune with his Communist idea, his Jesus will be a Communist. His Jesus will be “Comrade Jesus.”
And that will be fiction, your fiction. You impose something on Jesus, and everything can be imposed because people like Jesus or Buddha are so pure, so empty – they are white, empty curtains – you can impose anything on them, and they are so nonresistant.
Jesus has said, “Resist not evil.” These people are nonresistant, you can impose anything. And now they are not there either, to do anything about it. Jesus cannot say, “I am not a comrade.” You can find statements which are of your liking, and then you can prove that Jesus was the first Communist. In fact, the real apostles of Jesus are not Thomas, Luke, but Karl Marx, Engels, Lenin, and particularly Mao – because Alok is Chinese too.
What Jesus do you think is real? On what criterion will you decide? You will be choosing according to your mind; you will drop many things which don’t fit with you. And that is the wrong approach.
You are already in great confusion, Alok. Just look at your confusion, and don’t try to find out what the “real” Jesus is. The best way is to find out who you are, what is real in you. And that is the reality of Jesus because the real is not separate. Whatever is real in you is real in me. Whatever is unreal in you is unreal in me. The only way to know is to come to a conscious state of your own reality, what is real in you. You are living in dreams and thoughts. You have not contacted your own ground of being, and you start deciding who the real Jesus is. Not only that, then that real Jesus sends you here to me. Now, you will not even be able to understand me because the Jesus that you have created in your mind will be continuously interfering.
You ask, “Did the real master Jesus, the one beyond all Christian distortions…?” And what do you think, you are not distorting? Maybe it is your distortion, but do you think your distortion is better than the distortion of the Christians? It can’t be better; a distortion is a distortion, and all minds distort. Only in a state of meditation is there no distortion.
So please, become more meditative. When you are silent, utterly silent and quiet, contented, fulfilled, just herenow, and no thought moves in your mind – the mind functions no longer and you are transported into an unbounded space, contentless, thoughtless, but fully alert – you will know what is real in you. And whatever is real in you, is real in Jesus, is real in me – because it is real. Real is real. It makes no difference between me and you, Jesus and Buddha. Reality is one.
You ask, “Did the real master Jesus, the one beyond all the Christian distortions, to whom I once opened my heart, did he send me to you?” Why bother him? Can’t you come to me on your own? Can’t you have even that much responsibility? Are you are throwing the responsibility on Jesus, so if something goes wrong, he will be wrong? If I am not proved right according to you, Jesus will be at fault, and you can complain. This is childish. Why can’t you come yourself? When are you going to become a little more mature? The moment a person is mature he takes responsibility on his own shoulders.
This is tricky, cunning, clever. Writing this question, you must have thought that you are writing a beautiful thing. And this is egoistic too: Jesus sends you, Jesus takes care of you, you are so important. On this earth there are millions and millions of people, and Jesus has chosen Alok! Just think of it, how great Alok is – and he sends him to me.
Can’t you come yourself? How long are you going to lean upon others? Why are you so afraid of committing mistakes? This is just a fear of committing mistakes. Jesus will not commit a mistake; if Jesus sends, it must be right. If you choose, who knows? It may be wrong. But remember, people grow only through committing many mistakes. Each mistake is an opportunity to grow. Don’t be irresponsible and don’t hide your irresponsibility behind beautiful names. Jesus is only a trick of your mind.
“All the way back this time, tentative and unsure, I come to you. I would hold the mala and look at your picture and you would say to me, using Jesus’ words…” Why are you making things complicated? Why can’t I say things directly to you? Why should I use Jesus’ words? It is your own mind that is imposing these words of Jesus on me. It is your own memory that is playing a tape, that is simply an old record.
“Come unto me ye who labor and are heavy laden and I will give you rest, for my yoke is easy and my burden light.” Why should I say it through Jesus’ words? But neither have I said anything to you… I am here, so I can say, “Alok, I have not said a single thing to you.” Now Jesus is not here, he cannot refute you, but at least I can refute you. These are your words. These are your desires. You are afraid of me; you would like to rest, not to change. You would like the yoke to be easy, and it is not easy. You would like it to be light, and it is not light.
Just remember Jesus again. He has also said – but that didn’t occur to you – that “Those who are going to follow me will have to carry their crosses on their own shoulders.” Now, to carry a cross on your own shoulders can’t be easy, can’t be light. It was not light even for Jesus; carrying the cross, the heavy cross, he stumbled on the way. Two, three times he fell on the ground.
The road was uphill. They were going to Golgotha to crucify him, and they had forced him to carry his own cross. It was heavy, crosses can’t be light. It was not a gold cross that you can hang around your neck. It was not a cross that Christians, Christian priests, bishops, popes, hang around their necks. It was not a gold cross! His neck was going to be hung on it. The weight was heavy, and he was thirsty and hungry, and they were forcing him to carry the cross, and he fell two, three times.
The crucifixion was not easy either. Death cannot be easy. When Mohammed says, “Die before you die,” it is not going to be easy. Don’t deceive yourself. The work of inner transformation is hard.
But that’s what Alok is desiring, that it should not be hard – hoping against hope. When Jesus was crucified on the cross, he was really angry at God. For a moment all trust was shattered. He looked at the sky and asked, “Have you forsaken me? What are you doing to me?” For a moment it was really hard, unbearable. He recaptured his balance, that is another matter, but the weight was not light. It can’t be. No real transformation can be light.
Then why does he say, “Come unto me ye who labor and are heavy laden and I will give you rest, for my yoke is easy and my burden light?” This is just seduction. I also seduce you, giving you an idea of a very easy sannyas. It is not.
I have heard…

An old man with his young son were lost in a forest. By the evening they reached a small hut. They inquired, “How far is the town?” They were utterly tired. Hungry, thirsty, they wanted to reach the town as soon as possible. They wanted to eat something and rest. And the old man was really old, very old.
The man in the hut said, “The town is ten miles away.”
Just listening to this, ten miles, the old man simply fell on the ground. He was not even able to take one step – ten miles?
The woman who was also in the hut, the wife of the villager, said to her husband, “Please, make it two miles. Look how tired they are. Make it two miles.”

When somebody is too tired, it is good not to say the whole thing. Bit by bit let them pass, two miles, then again two miles, then again two miles.
So when you ask me, “When is it going to happen, Osho?” I say, “Soon,” just to keep you alive and moving. That’s what Jesus is doing, each master has to do. The whole truth cannot be told to you, you will not be able to bear it. You can absorb it only in small chunks, small bits. Once they are digested, you will be able to bear a little more.
But don’t try to deceive yourself that Jesus has spoken to you. You say, “I was surprised by such happiness to be before you in darshan and was transported by the eternal now of your presence. Yet underneath somewhere I have held back.” That has happened because of your idea of Jesus – his sending you here, that I have been speaking to you through Jesus’ words, using his statements. That’s why you could not be totally open to me.
Yes, you were happy, but that is nothing compared to the bliss that could have happened if you were really available. Jesus was standing between you and me – and not Jesus really, but your idea of Jesus. And Karl Marx is there, and Lenin and Mao. It is a big queue! To search for you behind this queue is very difficult, Alok.
Let these people be dispersed. I am enough, just as Jesus was enough when he was here. There was no need for anybody else. When you are with a master, the master is enough. Either you are with him, or you are not. If you are with him, he is enough. Then you don’t bring Jesus, Buddha, etcetera; there is no need. I am not saying that they are wrong, but that there is no need. Why unnecessarily complicate the phenomenon? It is already complicated.
Just face me. Just look directly into my eyes and let me approach you. Let me hold your hands. Either you are with me, or you are not with me, but don’t play these cunning games: “I am with you because Jesus has sent me.” I have never sent anybody to Jesus, so why should he send anybody to me? He was enough unto himself, I am enough unto myself.
“Yet underneath, somewhere I have held back.” That is where your Jesus and Mao and all the others are standing and keeping you back, holding you.
“I have a bitter hatred toward false teachers…” Why should you have a bitter hatred toward false teachers? That very hatred will not allow you to be in communion with a master. False teachers are also needed because there are false disciples. Where will they go? Do you never think of the false disciples? You may have never thought about it, never heard the word “false disciple,” but false disciples need false teachers. You get only that which you deserve. If you are false, you will get a false teacher.
Why this hatred? The false is also necessary because knowing the false as false, you will be able to know the true as true. Otherwise how will you know? Recognizing the false as false is a great step. And the real disciple will be thankful even to false teachers – because he will say, “It is through them that I have been able to come to the real master.”
A man of understanding can use everything. Even poison can be used as nectar. All that is needed is awareness, intelligence. Hatred is not needed at all. If you are full of hatred for false teachers, even if you come across a true master, your hatred will become a barrier – because how are you going to decide suddenly, “Now I have come to the true”? The suspicion, the doubt, the mistrust, the hatred will be there, and that won’t allow you to know the real. And if you can’t know the real, you will decide that he is also false. You are caught in a vicious circle.
There is no need to carry any hatred, no need to carry any wounds. If you lived with a false teacher, that simply shows you were foolish. And living with a false teacher, you have become at least so wise that you know who is a false teacher.

Mulla Nasruddin was selling a certain medicine – it was nothing, just sugar pills, homeopathic pills – and he was saying, “Whosoever takes these becomes intelligent.”
Somebody purchased some, and the next day the man went to Mulla and said, “You deceived me. They were only sugar pills.”
Mulla said, “Look, you have already become wise. Yesterday you could not see that they were just sugar pills. Now, you see? It has worked.”

You were foolish if you got caught by a false teacher. Don’t be angry at the false teacher, just see your foolishness. He has not done anything wrong to you. You were foolish enough, that’s why you were caught. And if you have become aware that he is false, at least for this much you must be grateful to him. See? It has worked, you are wiser.
And remember always, before coming to the right door you will have to knock on many wrong doors because a true master is a rare phenomenon: once in a while. You will have to search the whole earth, and only once in a while will you come across a real master. You will come across thousands of unreal pretenders, but they also help. There is no need to carry any hatred for them, they also help. Knocking on a wrong door, seeing that it is wrong, slowly, slowly you become aware of what is wrong. And that’s how one learns about what is right.
“I have a bitter hatred,” you say, “toward false teachers and have been afraid to be duped again.” They cannot dupe you unless you are ready to be duped, unless you are willing to be duped. It all depends on you.
Never throw the responsibility on anybody else – that’s what, Alok, you are doing in your whole question. You throw the responsibility on Jesus, that he has sent you here. You throw the responsibility on false teachers, that they have been duping you. And you keep yourself aloof, as if you are not involved in it at all, that you are not a participant. How can a false teacher dupe you if you are not ready to be duped?
My whole effort is to make you aware of your responsibility – because only by becoming aware of the responsibility do you become mature. You become grown-up. Remember, just growing old is not synonymous with being grown-up. Everybody grows old, very few people grow up. Aging is one thing, growing up another. What is the meaning of growing up? – taking all the responsibilities, good and bad. Whatever happens to you, you are responsible for it. This vision will help you to grow because if you are responsible, you will become more conscious of each step that you take.
You say, “I come cluttered with my fear, doubt, pride, rebellion, guilt and wrath which erupts even at you.” The whole problem is one: you don’t take any responsibility on yourself. That’s why you erupt in wrath and anger even against me, and for no reason at all.
That’s what happened in America. Alok was running a center there in San Francisco. A few sannyasins had gathered, and they said to Alok, “We don’t feel Osho’s presence in your center as we have felt it in other centers.” And they were right; they were not wrong. They were really sensitive. They must have felt your presence, Alok, not my presence – because you have not yet allowed me to happen to you. You have been a fence-sitter. You have been just sitting on the fence, ready to jump if something went wrong, jump away and escape.
You are not yet involved with me; you are not ready to die with me and live with me. You are still carrying your ego.
They were right. And what happened? When they said this, that they didn’t feel Osho’s presence in Alok’s place, he didn’t listen to what they were saying, he didn’t meditate over it. On the contrary, he threw my mala, jumped on it, broke the mala, went to the ocean and threw it in. And that time he also felt that God was saying to him, “Throw away this mala!” and he threw it away. Then God said, “Now you also jump.” But he didn’t jump. He himself wrote to me, “I only followed half. I could not gather that much courage.” So if it is a question of throwing me away, you can throw away easily, but if it is a question of throwing yourself away, you cannot.
If it is a question of choosing between me and you, Alok, you will choose yourself. And that is not the way of a disciple. A disciple would have done just the reverse, he would not have thrown away the mala. Yes, he may have jumped himself. He would have said to God, “Okay. If you say for me to jump, I will jump, but I cannot throw away the mala.”
Remember, just the other day I was telling you about Majnu, who said, “I will only open my eyes to see my beloved Laila”? Then God came, out of great compassion, and he said, “Look who is standing before you! I am God myself, asking you to look at me.” But Majnu said, “Get lost. If it is a choice between Laila and God, I choose Laila.”
If someday there is a choice between the master and God, the disciple will choose the master – because it is only through the master that he can reach God. The master is the bridge. Choosing God against the master, you will never reach because you will not have a bridge.
You are full of “…fear, doubt, pride, rebellion, guilt, wrath…” but if you look deep down, these are only on the circumference. At the center is nothing but an egoistic, narcissistic, neurotic attitude. You are an egoist, Alok, and you will have to die as an ego. Only then can I live in you and transform you.
Again, you say, “…I long to trust and surrender, somehow knowing it is the best way for coming home totally, to you, to myself, to Jesus, to the universe.” Again Jesus comes in. I am not separate from Jesus, Jesus is not separate from me. There is no need to say “…coming to you and coming to Jesus…” It is an unnecessary repetition.
And the whole thing is very calculative. You say, “…I long to trust and surrender, somehow knowing it is the best way for coming home totally…” You are not yet risking. Calculating: to surrender seems to be the best way, the most rational way. But how can you surrender with this attitude? Surrender means there is no way left. Surrender means, “I have failed, and failed totally.” Surrender means there is no hope, “There is no possibility of my ever reaching the goal.” In that helplessness, in that hopelessness surrender happens. It is not something that you do. You cannot “do” surrender. If it is done it is not surrender; you are there standing behind it as a doer, you can take it back.
Surrender means you have disappeared. Now you cannot take it back, there is no way. You cannot go back, there is nowhere to go back to. Surrender is a happening, and it only happens, not out of calculation but out of the failure of all calculation, when you have utterly failed. You have tried this way and that, and you have tried all the possible ways and you see that you cannot reach anywhere, you go on moving in the same groove.
That’s what happened to Buddha. After six years of tremendous effort he came to recognize the fact that whatever he was going to do was not going to help.
Because it comes from the ego, how can it take you out of the ego? It comes as part of the ego, is an extension of the ego; how can it take you beyond the ego? It is the ego who becomes the doer; the ego cannot decide to surrender. If it decides, it has deceived you again. Then it is there, controlling even your surrender, and the ego cannot control your surrender. If it is true, surrender means egolessness.
Buddha worked hard for six years in all possible ways, and there was no way to come home. The more he tried, the farther away he was. One evening, sitting under a tree near the river Niranjana, he just became aware of the whole absurdity of effort as such. He laughed and went to sleep. There was nothing else to do; that laughter was the end of all effort. It was ridiculous. He laughed at himself, went to sleep. “For the first time” – later on, he told his disciples – “For the first time, I slept because there was no dream, no thought.”
When you have dropped all effort, what dream can come to you? What thought can come to you? There is nothing to do, all doing has failed. He was in a state of utter hopelessness, helplessness. Don’t think that he was sad. When you are really hopeless you cannot be sad either. Sadness means you are still hoping; sadness means this effort has failed, that’s why you are sad. But some other effort will succeed. Again you will dream, again you will think, again you will plan, again you will project. Hopelessness means now there is no hope, not, “I am a failure.”
In reality, there is no possibility for human egos to succeed because they are illusory, and an illusion cannot succeed.
Seeing this, he laughed. In that laughter, the transformation happened. He slept the whole night without any dreams, without any thought. It must have been a deep, deep sleep. And by the morning, when the last star was disappearing in the sky, he opened his eyes – and as he saw the last star disappearing, he also disappeared. That’s the meaning of becoming enlightened. Then he used to say, “Doing, I failed. Non-doing, I arrived.”
The whole secret, the great secret, the secret of the secrets, is in non-doing. Non-doing is surrender.
Alok, you cannot figure it out. You cannot reckon, “Let us now surrender because surrender seems to be the best way to attain something – bliss, God, Jesus, samadhi, enlightenment, nirvana.” But then surrender is a means to some end, and true surrender is not a means to any end. Surrender is simply surrender. There is no question of going anywhere, one has simply relaxed. That very relaxation – and you have come home.
You will not find me there, you will not find Jesus there, you will not find yourself there. You will not find the thing that you call “the universe.” You will not find anything that you have known or dreamed up to now. You will find a totally new phenomenon, utterly discontinuous with all that you have thought, dreamed about.
But you say, “…I long to trust” – it is a desire in you – “and surrender, somehow knowing it is the best way for coming home totally, to you, to myself, to Jesus, to the universe.” You will not find anything – the universe, me, Jesus, you. Nothing is found when you are surrendered, when you are in trust, when you have come home. And what you find is inexpressible.
The Sufis call… The first state when you surrender, they call fana fi’llah: disappearing into God. And then out of that disappearing, something starts appearing – that they call baqa bi’llah: appearance of the total, the inexpressible, the indefinable. That indefinable is called God, that incredible experience of disappearing into the whole and becoming the whole. You will not find anything that you can think about right now, all words are inadequate to express it. It is a wordless experience.
There is not even an experiencer: there is no division between the knower and the known. The knower is the known, the experiencer is the experienced, the observer is the observed. All duality has disappeared. There is no subject, no object. It is a different state. You can call it transjective: neither subjective nor objective. It is transjective, it is transcendental to both.
You cannot find a word that will be relevant to it. It is so utterly new, your old mind cannot supply even a word to describe it.

The third question:
Osho,
Whenever I come to darshan, a deep sadness comes up. I feel like crying. I cry and then feel calm and exhausted. What is happening?
Asti, the whole time that you have been here with me, you have been trying to deceive me. That’s the root cause of your sadness.
Asti is afraid of groups. Hence she is afraid of meeting me – because if she meets me I will tell her to do Encounter, Tantra, Vipassana, Primal. Because of this fear she has been playing a deceptive game. When she arrives she never comes for an arrival darshan. She always comes for a departure darshan so I cannot give any group – because she is leaving the next day. Even if she comes for darshan, she never comes for a talking darshan. She sits at the back; she comes only for a silent darshan because if she talks, she is bound to be caught, trapped into some group. She cannot ask a question because if she asks a question, she will get a group. She cannot bring her problems to me. I have been watching, and I have been giving her enough rope. Now she is feeling sad.
That is natural – you have been avoiding me. You are here, and avoiding growth. You have not yet surrendered to me, you have not told me, “Osho, do whatever you want to do with me. Tell me whatever you would like me to do.” You have kept yourself aloof, you have kept yourself away, you have been protecting. Hence sadness is natural.
That’s why, Asti, when you come to darshan you feel sadness coming to you. When people come to darshan they feel great bliss arising in them. Why sadness in you? – because you know that you are being smart with me, clever and cunning. And remember, the people who are clever and cunning here are the people who are going to miss. Be innocent. Only then is there a possibility of transformation.
Asti, I would like to tell you this story. You have been trying hard to be smart and clever, but all smartness, all cleverness is stupid. A really intelligent person need not try to be clever, a really intelligent person is innocent. Intelligence is a function of innocence. And in trying to be clever… Often we fail to check our facts. We think we know the whole situation before we check it out.

I remember hearing about a young attorney whose first job was with a large railroad company. It was not long until he had his first case to try. A farmer noticed that his prize cow was missing from the field through which the railroad passed. He promptly went down and filed suit against the railroad company for the value of his cow, in the office of the justice of the peace.
In due course the case came up for hearing before the local justice of the peace in the back room of the general store, and the smart young attorney came down from the big city to defend the railroad company.
The first thing he did was to take the farmer, who had no attorney, over into a corner and begin talking to him about settling the case. Well, the young lawyer talked and talked and finally twisted the old farmer’s arm so that the farmer, very reluctantly, agreed to accept half of what he was claiming to settle the case.
After the farmer had signed the release and taken the check, the young lawyer just could not resist gloating over the old farmer a little bit, and he said, “You know, I hate to tell you this, but actually I put one over on you this morning. I could not have won the case. The engineer was asleep, and the fireman was in the caboose when the train went through your farm that morning. I did not have one witness to put on the stand.”
The old farmer smiled a bit and went on chewing his tobacco. Then he said, “Well, I will tell you, young feller, I was a little worried about winning that case myself. You know, that durned cow came home this morning.”

Asti, you have been trying to be smart, you have been trying very hard. But it is good that you have asked the question. Drop this cleverness. To be with me you have to be open, you have to be utterly naked. If you don’t want to do the groups, you could have cried and said, “No, Osho, I don’t want to do them.” But there is no need to hide, there is no need to pretend. Otherwise you will become sad because you have no contact with me, and naturally sadness will arise: “What am I doing here? Everybody else is growing; what am I doing here?”
You have been doing these games. Stop playing these games. You have to be sincere with me. And remember, more and more sannyasins will be coming. It will become more and more difficult for me if you are trying to be clever and cunning, you may be lost in the crowd. You have to be very open, sincere, true, authentic. These games cannot be played, we don’t have any time for them. Thousands and thousands of sannyasins are going to come, and then it will be difficult for you. If you want to hide, you can hide in the crowd; it will be difficult for me to find you.
So let us decide that if you want to be here, you have to be according to me, not according to yourself. Otherwise you will remain sad. Only surrender can help you. Only surrender can give me a chance to pour my grace into you.

The fourth question:
Osho,
What is education?
Parmar, man is born as a seed. He is born as a potentiality. He is not born as an actuality. And this is very special, this is extraordinary because in the whole of existence only man is born as a potentiality, every other animal is born actual.
A dog is born as a dog, he is to remain the same his whole life. The lion is born as a lion. Man is not born as a man, man is born only as a seed: he may become, he may not become. Man has a future; no other animal has a future. All animals are born instinctively perfect. Man is the only imperfect animal. Hence growth, evolution, is possible.
Education is a bridge between the potential and the actual. Education is to help you to become that which you are, only in a seed form. And this is what I am doing here; this is a place of education. What is being done in the ordinary schools and colleges and universities is not education. It only prepares you to get a good job, to earn well; it is not real education. It does not give you life. Maybe it can give you a better standard of living, but a better standard of living is not a better standard of life. They are not synonymous.
The so-called education that goes on in the world prepares you only to earn bread. Jesus says, “Man cannot live by bread alone.” And that’s what your universities have been doing. They prepare you to earn bread in a better way, in an easier way, in a more comfortable way, with less effort, with less hardship. But all that they do is prepare you to earn your bread and butter. It is a very, very primitive kind of education, it does not prepare you for life.
Hence you see so many robots walking around. They are perfect as clerks, as stationmasters, as deputy collectors. They are perfect, they are skillful, but if you look deep down in them, they are just beggars and nothing else. They have not even tasted one bite of life. They have not known what life is, what love is, what light is. They have not known anything of godliness, they have not tasted anything of existence, they don’t know how to sing and how to dance and how to celebrate. They don’t know the grammar of life; they are utterly stupid. Yes, they earn – they earn more than others, they are very skillful and they go on rising higher and higher on the ladder of success – but deep down they remain empty, poor.
Education is to give you inner richness. It is not just to make you more informed: that is a very primitive idea of education. I call it primitive because it is rooted in fear, rooted in: “If I am not well educated, I will not be able to survive.” I call it primitive because deep down it is very violent: it teaches you competition, it makes you ambitious. It is nothing but a preparation for a cut-throat, competitive world where everybody is the enemy of everybody else.
Hence the world has become a madhouse. Love cannot happen. How can love happen in such a violent, ambitious, competitive world where everybody is at each other’s throat? This is very primitive because it is based in the fear: “If I am not well educated, well protected, highly informed, I may not be able to survive in the struggle of life.” It takes life only as a struggle.
My vision of education is that life should not be taken as a struggle for survival, life should be taken as a celebration. Life should not be only competition, life should be joy too – singing and dancing and poetry and music and painting, and all that is available in the world. Education should prepare you to fall in tune with it – with the trees, with the birds, with the sky, with sun and moon.
And education should prepare you to be yourself. Right now it prepares you to be an imitator; it teaches you how to be like others. This is miseducation. Right education will teach you how to be yourself, authentically yourself. You are unique. There is nobody like you, has never been, will never be. This is great respect that existence has showered on you. This is your glory, that you are unique. Don’t become imitative, don’t become carbon copies.
But that’s what your so-called education goes on doing; it makes carbon copies, it destroys your original face. The word education has two meanings, both are beautiful. One meaning is very well known, although not practiced at all. That is: to draw something out of you. Education means: to draw out that which is within you, to make your potential actual, like you draw water from a well.
But that is not being practiced. On the contrary, things are being poured into you, not drawn out of you. They go on pouring geography and history and science and mathematics into you. You become parrots. You have been treated like computers; just as they feed the computers, they feed you. Your educational institutions are places where things are crammed into your head.
Real education will be to bring out what is hidden in you – what existence has put in you as a treasure – to discover it, to reveal it, to make you luminous.
Another meaning of the word, which is even far deeper: education comes from the word educare: it means to lead you from darkness to light. A tremendously significant meaning: to lead you from darkness to light. The Upanishads say: “Lord, lead us from untruth to truth – asto ma sadgamay. Lord, lead us from death to deathlessness – mrityorma amritamgamaya. Lord, lead us from darkness to light – tamaso ma jyotirgamaya.” That is exactly the meaning of the word education: tamaso ma jyotirgamayma – from darkness to light.
Man lives in darkness, in unconsciousness, and man is capable of becoming full of light. The flame is there, it has to be provoked. The consciousness is there, but it has to be awakened. You have been given all, you have brought it with you, but the whole idea that you have become a man just by having a human body is wrong. That idea has been of tremendous mischief down the ages.
Man is born just as an opportunity, as an occasion… And very few people attain: a Jesus, a Buddha, a Mohammed, a Bahauddin. Very few people, few and far between, really become man – when they become full of light and there is no darkness left, when there is no unconsciousness lingering anywhere in their soul, when all is light, when they are just awareness.
A man asked Buddha…

The man was an astrologer, a very learned scholar. When he saw Buddha he was puzzled. He had never seen such beauty, such grace. Buddha was sitting under a tree. The man was just in awe; he bowed down to Buddha and he asked, “Are you a deva, an angel? Have you descended from heaven – because I have never seen such grace on the earth? Who are you? Are you a gandharva?”
Gandharvas are, mythologically, the musicians of the gods. They are very graceful, obviously – they are the musicians of the gods. Their very presence is musical. Just in their presence you will start hearing melodies, just being in their presence you will fall into a totally different rhythm. Their very presence is music, celestial music. And the astrologer heard that music around Buddha.
He asked, “Are you a gandharva?”
Buddha said, “No, I am not a god, I am not a gandharva.”
“Then who are you? Are you just a man?”
And Buddha said, “No, I am not a man either.”
“Then who are you?”
The man went on asking, and Buddha went on saying, “No, no, no.”
The astrologer became more and more puzzled, and finally he asked, “Then who are you?”
And Buddha said, “I am awareness.”

Awareness, just awareness, pure awareness – and only then is one fulfilled. Then life is a benediction.
Education is to bring you from darkness to light. That’s what I am doing here.
Parmar has asked this question because the Indian government is not ready to accept my work as education. It is natural. They cannot accept it as education because I don’t create clerks and stationmasters and deputy collectors. I am creating new human beings. For them that is dangerous. If this is education, then they cannot allow it to happen. It is rebellion.
I am teaching you to be yourself. I am teaching you to be fearless; I am teaching you not to yield to social pressure; I am teaching you not to be a conformist. I am teaching you not to hanker for comfort and convenience – because if you hanker for comfort and convenience, society will give them to you, but at a cost. And the cost is great: you get convenience, but you lose your consciousness. You get comfort, but you lose your soul.
You can have respectability, but then you are not true to yourself; you are a pseudo human being, you have betrayed your God and yourself. But society wants that you should betray yourself. Society wants to use you as a machine, society wants you to be obedient. Society does not need you to function as an intelligent being – because an intelligent being will behave in an intelligent way, and there may be moments when he will say, “No, I cannot do that.”
For example, if you are really intelligent and aware, you cannot be part of an army. Impossible. To be part of an army you need, as a basic requirement, unintelligence. That’s why in the army they manage to destroy your intelligence in every way. Years are needed to destroy your intelligence; they call it “training.” Stupid orders have to be followed: right turn, left turn, march forward, march backward – this and that – and they go on and on every day, morning, evening. Slowly, slowly the person becomes a robot, he starts functioning like a machine.
I have heard…

A woman went to a psychoanalyst and said, “I am very worried, I cannot sleep. My husband is a colonel in the army. Whenever he comes home for holidays, it becomes a nightmare for me. Whenever he is sleeping on his right side he snores, and snores so loudly that not only am I disturbed, even the neighbors are disturbed. Can you suggest something to me? What should I do?”
The psychoanalyst thought it over and then he said, “Do one thing. Try this tonight, maybe it will work.” He gave her a recipe, and it worked. The recipe was simple. He said to her, “When he starts snoring, just tell him, ‘Left turn.’”
She could not believe it, but when she did it, it worked, even in his sleep. He snored only on his right side, so when she said in his ear, slowly, softly, not very loudly, “Left turn,” just out of old habit he turned left. The snoring stopped, even in sleep.
I have heard…

William James has quoted this instance, a real actual instance. After the First World War, a man who had retired from the army was carrying a bucket full of eggs on his head, and somebody just joked – a few people were standing by the side of the road and one man said loudly, “Attention!”
The man simply fell to attention, and the bucket fell, and the eggs broke all over the road. He was very angry. He said, “What kind of joke is this?”
They said, “We have not done anything. We have just said, ‘Attention.’ Are we not allowed to say that?”

And the man had been retired from the army for at least ten years. But it persists.
I have heard…

An insomniac boxer went to the doctor for some medical help. The ex-pugilist had tried mild sedation, but it didn’t seem to work. The doctor, hesitating to prescribe a more addictive kind, said, “Look, before I prescribe this heavier injection I want you to try an old-fashioned remedy. You may laugh, but it actually works. Try getting yourself completely relaxed, and then start counting to a hundred.”
A few days later, the old fighter came back and said, “Doctor, I can’t do it. Every time I start counting, I jump up at the count of nine.”

The whole training in the army is to destroy your consciousness, is to make you an autonomous machine. Then you can go and kill. Otherwise, if you are still carrying a little bit of intelligence, you will see that the person you are killing is innocent. He has not done anything to you or to anybody. He must have a wife at home who is waiting for him to come back; he may have small children, and they will become beggars; he may have an old mother or an old father, and they may go mad. And, “Why am I killing this man – because the officer says, ‘Start killing. Fire’?”
An intelligent person will not be able to fire. An intelligent person may choose to die himself rather than to kill innocent people. Because a foolish politician wants to get involved in a war, because a politician wants to have more power, because of some stupid statements of the politicians, the war has started. He will not kill.
This I call education: to make people more intelligent. And that’s what I am doing here. If this fire spreads, this old, rotten society cannot survive. It survives on your unconsciousness, it lives on your unconsciousness.
So it is natural that the government will not recognize this place as a place of education. For them, it is one of the most dangerous places.
But as far as I am concerned, this is education. Tamaso ma jyotirgamaya – lord, lead me from darkness to light.
Enough for today.

============================================================

It is recorded that someone said to the great philosopher Saadi, “I wish for perception, so that I shall become wise.”
Saadi said, “Perception without wisdom is worse than nothing at all.”
He was asked, “How can that be?”
Saadi said, “As in the case of the vulture and the kite. The vulture said to the kite, ‘I have far better eyesight than you. Why, I can see a grain of wheat down there on the ground, while you see nothing at all.’
“The two birds plummeted down to find the wheat, which the vulture could see and the kite could not. When they were quite near the ground the kite saw the wheat. The vulture continued his dive and swallowed the wheat. And then he collapsed: for the wheat was poisoned.”
Man is a slave. He is not born as a slave, he is born free. He is born as freedom, but he is found in chains everywhere. He lives in chains, he dies in chains. This is the greatest calamity that has happened to humanity.
The moment a child is born, the society starts transforming the child into a slave; it is not interested in free people. It is afraid of freedom, freedom seems to be dangerous. A slave is safe. And the society needs only slaves because they can be exploited. The priest is interested in slaves, the politician is interested in slaves, the pundit is interested in slaves.
These three p’s are the most poisonous p’s. These three have been the root cause of human suffering, and man will remain chained, imprisoned, unless he gets free of the politician, the priest, and the pundit. These three have to disappear from the world. Only then can man bloom in freedom.
What these people have done to humanity has to be understood – because this is your story: how you have become a prisoner. The question is not how to find God, the question is how to get out of this prison that you call your mind, that you call your culture, that you call your religion – beautiful names for ugly things. If you look deep, without prejudice, you will be surprised: your mind is not yours at all. It is a conditioning forced upon you from the outside. The mind that you call yours is not yours, it belongs to the exploiters. They have played a trick upon you: they have implanted this mind in you, and through this mind they go on controlling you. Hence they have been very much against people like Jesus, Buddha, Mohammed.
Why did they crucify Jesus? Why did they poison Socrates? Why did they murder Mansoor? These were innocent people, they had not done any harm to anybody. What was their sin? This was their sin, that they were trying to make a door so that people could get out of the prison, so that slavery could be destroyed from the earth.
History says slavery has been destroyed. That is all bunk! It has not been destroyed, it has only moved from the gross to the subtle. Yes, you don’t have chains on your hands and on your feet because the chains have become more subtle; they have gone into your mind, they have become more inner. On the outside you are enjoying freedom, democracy, equality, brotherhood – just empty impotent words – deep down there is no brotherhood, there cannot be.
How is there any possibility of brotherhood if there are Christians, Hindus, Mohammedans? How can there be any possibility of brotherhood if there are nations: India, Germany, England? It is impossible. Man is constantly at war, each moment you are living in conflict. And how can there be equality when you have been taught from the very beginning to be ambitious?
Ambition means that you have to be higher than the other. Ambition means that you have to prove your superiority, that you have to prove everybody else is inferior to you, that you have to succeed. If success remains the god, if ambition remains your education, how can there be equality? To talk about equality is utter nonsense. It does not exist even in communist countries; it cannot exist anywhere unless ambition disappears.
In Russia or in China there are still classes. Their names have changed, the labels are different. Now there is no class of the poor and the rich; a new class has arisen, of the rulers and the ruled. It is the same old game, it makes no difference at all. We go on playing the same game. All that we do in the name of revolution is to change the labels.
The real question is not how to find truth because you cannot find the truth unless you are free. Truth arrives in freedom. Jesus has said, “Truth liberates.” That is true. That is only half of the story, that truth will make you free. The other side, which has not been told to you, is also as important: truth happens only in freedom. In fact, truth and freedom are two aspects of the same coin, they happen together. If you are unfree you cannot attain truth, and if you have attained truth you cannot be unfree. But from where to begin? If you start with truth, you will become a victim of words, philosophies, theologies, scriptures. You will be lost in the jungle of linguistic logical speculations.
Start with freedom: that’s my message to you. Come out of the prison that has been imposed upon you – and the prison cannot exist if you don’t cooperate with it. That is the only ray of hope, that it cannot exist without your cooperation. But you cooperate with it. It feels safe, it feels secure, it feels convenient and comfortable, it feels warmer, and you have decorated it well from the inside.
Down the ages that’s what man has been doing, decorating his prison cell. You have made it really beautiful inside, it almost looks as if it is a temple. You have painted your chains beautifully. You have covered your chains with gold and silver, they look like ornaments. Hence you go on cooperating.
Freedom is the basic requirement if you want to know godliness, if you want to know at all what this life is, and what the benediction of this life is, and what the beauty of this existence is. If you want to know it at all, you will have to come out of your prison. You will have to risk. Because the prison seems comfortable and you have lived in it so long, you have become accustomed to it. You will have to come into the open, under the sun and the moon and the sky. You will have to come into the wind. You may have lived so long in the cage that you may be afraid to open your wings again. You may have completely forgotten that you have wings.
This is the situation where man exists. But before we can make a breakthrough out of the prison walls, we will have to understand how the prison is made, what the strategy is, of what it consists. The most fundamental strategy is that the priests and the politicians and the pundits have been substituting every real thing with something unreal. That is the most fundamental strategy of how this prison, this slavery, has been created.
They have substituted marriage for love. Marriage is a plastic thing. It can be beautiful if it comes as a consequence of love, but the priests have managed it: they say, “First marriage, then love.” Then love never happens. They have stopped your most significant part, your heart, from functioning. After marriage you may start liking the woman or the man because you live together, just as brothers like sisters and sisters like brothers – but there can be no poetry, no thrill, no ecstasy. Love will move on plain ground. It will not know any peaks, it will not be acquainted with orgasmic peaks.
And exactly like this, they have been substituting every real thing with something unreal. Marriage is synthetic, it is man-made. Love is God-made. Love happens, marriage is manufactured. Beware of all that is manufactured by man. It looks like the real thing and it is not, it is only a pretension. It only creates hypocrisy and nothing else, and you cannot pretend for long. Sooner or later the pretension wears out and then you are left in misery.
I have heard…

A little boy and his sister put on their parents’ clothing. They went next door and knocked. When the neighbor answered it they said, “Mr. and Mrs. Brown have come to call.”
Taking it all in her stride, the neighbor lady said, “Please do come in, Mr. and Mrs. Brown. Will you join me in some refreshments?”
After serving them milk and cookies, the lady asked, “Care for anymore?”
“Thank you, no,” replied the little girl. “We must be going home now – Mr. Brown just wet his pants.”

How long can you pretend? Sooner or later you will have to face the reality. And you are just using the clothes, you are not Mr. Brown. Sooner or later you will wet your pants – and it is going to be sooner than later.
Man is living in hypocrisy, in utter hypocrisy. You are not what you think you are, you are not what others say you are, you are not what you believe you are. This is the most fundamental strategy of creating a prison.
You are living in hypocrisy; that is your slavery, and for every real thing there has been a substitute. For example, character has been substituted for consciousness. Character is man-made, consciousness is divine. A conscious person has no character at all. A conscious person is utterly characterless, he need not have character. Character is a very poor thing. A conscious man lives by his consciousness, his consciousness is his character. He need not depend on any outer discipline, he has an inner light to live by. He responds moment to moment, not out of a certain dead habit which is called character. He responds moment to moment as the situation demands. He is conscious, he has not decided beforehand what to do and what not to do. That’s what character is: deciding beforehand what to do, what not to do, creating an automatic reaction in yourself, becoming mechanical. That’s what character is all about.
If somebody insults him, the man of character has a ready-made answer. The man of consciousness has no ready-made answers. He need not be bothered. He has consciousness, he has a mirrorlike quality. He will reflect the situation, and he will respond to the situation. His act will be out of that moment’s awareness. His act will not be out of the past, out of memory, out of the mind. His act will be born anew in the present. His act will be fresh, as fresh as dewdrops in the morning. His act will have beauty, his act will have splendor, his very act will be that of grace.
The man of character is ugly. He is dull, stupid; he lives in the past, he lives in habits. He has created what are called “good habits” – but why do you need habits? You need habits because you can’t depend on your awareness, otherwise there is no need to have any habits. You can always rely on your awareness, you know you will be there, fully aware – so why prepare beforehand? There is no need. Whatever is required by the moment will arise in you.
The society has substituted character for consciousness. Children are very conscious, more alert than they will ever be. You can watch children; that’s why they look so alive, so fresh, such a bubbling cheerfulness. Where does all that disappear to? And look at people who have character: you will always see a kind of dullness in their eyes. You will not find any spark, you will not see intelligence. Children are intelligent. They are not yet covered by layers of dust, they have not yet gone through the factory called education, they have not yet been cultured. They are yet wild, and they still have the freedom of wild animals, and the innocence and the joy. They act moment to moment.
But we start cultivating them, we start curbing their freedom. We start imposing, “Do this, don’t do that.” We start imposing do’s and don’ts on them. Soon they will forget all about freedom, soon they will start acting out of the past, pretending. Soon they will no longer be alive.

A small girl was getting ready for her first dance. She was very ecstatically thrilled. Her mother was dressing her and combing her hair. The small girl looked in the mirror – and she looked so beautiful. She asked, “Mummy, were there dances arranged in the old days also, when you were alive?”

Yes, people die long before they actually die. A person is dead by the age of four. Then he simply repeats, then he moves in a groove, in a rut. Then his whole life is just a long story of unconsciousness.
Character is the cause of your unconsciousness. If you are not forced to have a character, you will grow more and more brilliant, luminous. You will have to – because you will not have anything else to lean upon except your consciousness. Because of these substitutes – marriage for love, character for consciousness, morality for religion, logic for truth, philosophy for existential experience – because of these substitutes, you are lost in a kind of desert. You have become unconscious.
Whenever the question of truth arises, you start thinking immediately: that’s your response. How can you think about truth? You can think only about something you already know. Thinking can exist only within the boundary of the known. Truth is not known yet; how can you think about the unknown? The unknown cannot be thought about, the unknown has to be experienced.
But people go on thinking about truth, about God, about love. People go on thinking about things which have to be experienced and not thought about. But you have been told, “Become great thinkers and you will attain truth.” And a thinker is just a biocomputer, a thinker is never original. You must have heard about original thinkers: there have never been any original thinkers. Thinking is not original, so how can the thinker be original?
Experience is original. Yes, it is from the origins, it is original. Thinking is never original, it is always borrowed – but you can believe that you have come across an original thought. You may have simply forgotten where you read it, you may have forgotten from where you got it. If you search a little more deeply, you will find from where it came into you.
All thoughts have come from without. Experience arises within. The without has replaced the within, thinking has replaced experiencing. But one can pretend: one can mix one thought with another, can create a composition, and can think it is original. It is not.
I have heard…

A man was sitting on his porch rocking back and forth. He seemed to be having a long discussion with himself. Every once in a while he broke into loud laughter. At other times he shouted, “Phooey!” in disgust.
A policeman passing by stopped to watch the man and asked him what was going on. “I’m telling myself jokes,” the man told him. “And if I say so myself, most of them are very funny.”
“Then why do you keep saying ‘phooey’?” the policeman asked.
“I only say that when I’ve heard them before.”

That’s what you are doing, that’s what everyone is doing. All so-called original thinking is just nonsense. Thinking is never original, thought is always borrowed. It comes from the outside, no thought is yours.
But people start fighting – because they say, “I have to fight for my thought, for my ideology, for my religion, for my philosophy.” The Christian fights, the communist fights, the Hindu fights – for what? They have been persuaded to believe: “This thinking is yours, this philosophy is yours.” No thinking is yours and no ideology is yours. You have been deceived – but you can remain in this deception because you are unconscious. And you have become unconscious because consciousness grows only with the real.
With the unreal there is no growth. It is as if you have a real tree in the garden, it grows; but if you have a plastic tree, it will not grow. It can deceive the passersby, it can deceive the neighbors, but it will not grow. The unreal cannot grow.
Character is unreal, so it never grows. Knowledge is unreal, so it never grows. Morality is unreal, so it never grows. And because you become too attached to these ungrowing things, you stop growing. That’s what I mean when I say you become unconscious. Consciousness has to be a constant flow; only then do you remain conscious. Consciousness is riverlike. The moment you become stagnant you lose consciousness.
People are living unconsciously. It hurts to feel, “I am living unconsciously,” it goes against the ego. But this has to be understood – at least by seekers this has to be understood: you have lived an unconscious life. This very understanding is the beginning of consciousness.

A city-dweller came to a farm and saw a beautiful horse. He decided he had to have the animal. He bargained with the farmer and the farmer finally sold him the horse.
The city man jumped on the horse and said, “Giddyup!” The horse did not budge.
The farmer explained, “This is a special kind of horse. He will only move if you say, ‘Praise the Lord’” – he was really a very religious horse. “To stop him, you have to say ‘Amen.’”
Keeping this in mind the new owner yelled, “Praise the Lord” whereupon the horse took off with great speed. Soon horse and rider were headed for a cliff. Just in time, the rider remembered to say, “Amen!” The horse came to a screeching halt right at the edge of the cliff.
Relieved, the rider raised his eyes to heaven and exclaimed, “Praise the Lord!”

Watch man, watch yourself, watch and you will see: everybody is functioning unconsciously.
To become conscious is the whole secret of being religious. To become conscious is to get out of the prison. All that is needed is to become more and more conscious. More knowledge is not needed, more consciousness is needed. You already have too much knowledge, you are burdened with it. The load is heavy, you cannot move because of it. You have to unburden yourself, and you have to start finding the real and dropping the unreal.
Always search for the real and don’t be deceived by the society. Of course, people will be angry with you because the moment you become conscious, you are no longer under their control. They want you to be obedient, they want you to be disciplined – disciplined according to them, obedient to them. They go on talking as if there would be chaos if people stopped obeying. And they go on saying that if people stopped being disciplined, the society would be shattered.
That is not true. The society is shattered, it is a chaos, it is already a chaos. What more chaos can there be? You are living in a chaotic society, in a neurotic society. It is already hell.
When I say to stop obeying, what I am saying is: become your own self. The man who has become his own self will know when to obey, and when not to obey. He will not be obedient, he will not have a character of obedience. He will decide according to each case when to obey, and when not to obey. When he sees the truth he will obey, when he sees untruth he will not obey. He will remain free to obey or not to obey.
It is good to be free because you have obeyed stupid politicians for too long, and they have been creating violence, war, bloodshed, and nothing else. You have obeyed the priests too long and they have given you churches and temples and mosques, and they have taken the real temple of God away from you. They have talked about the other world but they have destroyed this world – and this is the only world there is.
So when I say don’t be disciplined by anybody, I don’t mean that you become a chaos; I mean you become an inner discipline. Be disciplined according to your own awareness. Follow your own awareness, be a light unto yourself. This is freedom – to become a light unto oneself.
But the society does not want you to become a light unto yourself – because if you become a light unto yourself, you will not follow all kinds of nonsense that you have been following up to now. And there are people who have a great vested interest in your unconsciousness. Hence your schools, colleges, and universities create unconsciousness, they don’t create consciousness. They create efficient robots. They give you knowledge but not wisdom, and wisdom is the real thing. Knowledge is a false, synthetic, man-manufactured thing, but knowledge looks like wisdom, and there is the danger. The plastic flower looks like the real rose, and that is where the danger is. If you have not seen a real rose for a long time, you may start thinking that it is a real rose – because all that you have come across again and again has been a plastic flower.
Hence Jesus is crucified. Jesus is a real rose, he had to be crucified. Otherwise others would have started comparing, and they would have come to know that what they had been carrying as a real rose was not a real rose, it was a synthetic, plastic flower. They would have thrown it away. Socrates had to be poisoned because he was trying to make people more aware.
When a person is aware he does not become disorderly, but his order comes from his own being. He is nobody’s slave, he is his own master. And that’s what sannyas is all about: becoming your own master. That is the meaning of the word swami: to become a master of one’s own, to be a light unto oneself. And there arises a different kind of order – real order.
Buddha lives in that order, and you can see the grace. He lives according to his own light. He has his own way, his own authentic individuality. He is a free man – but remember: a free man is going to be in constant conflict because a free man has to be in rebellion. That is the price one has to pay.
There are three more things which have been used as a strategy to destroy your freedom. They are secondary. The most basic is substituting the false for the real, but these three are also there.
The second is: creating a division in man, making man split – because whenever you are divided you become weak. Naturally, you start fighting with yourself. Then you cannot fight with the society, then you cannot fight with the prison. The prisoner is constantly in such inner conflict; from where will he gather enough energy to break through the wall? It will not be possible. So another trick has been played upon you: you have been divided. You have been told your body is separate from your soul; you have been told God is separate from the world; you have been told the other world is the real world, and this world is a false world, maya, illusion.
For at least ten thousand years a deep schizophrenic philosophy has been taught: divide. The moment you become divided, split, you are lost – because your right hand starts fighting with your left hand. Then both your hands are engaged, and the politician can exploit you, the priest can exploit you, the pundit can exploit you. Both your hands are engaged; you cannot defend, you cannot rebel.
My message to you is that there is only one world, this is the only world. This earth, this very earth, is paradise. I teach you to be earthy because there is nothing else, there is no other world. The other world is an invention of the priest. Your body and soul are one unity, it is all one. Don’t fight with your body, don’t try to be separate from your body, otherwise you will remain a victim. You will never become powerful, and power is needed to rebel, your energy is needed to rebel. Only when you are overflowing with energy can you be free. Otherwise you cannot be free.
And the third thing that has been used is fear. You have been made afraid – of hell, of punishment. And the other side of it is, you have been made very greedy for paradise, heaven, and the joys and the pleasures there: “You will be awarded greatly if you follow the priest; if you don’t follow the priest you will be punished very badly, horribly.”
Man has become fear-oriented. No child is born fear-oriented. You can watch any child: he can even play with a snake, he has no fear. He can even play with fire, he has no fear. The child comes into the world as fearlessness, but we impose fear. The child, every child, is love-oriented, and every so-called grown-up is fear-oriented.
I would like you to again become love-oriented. Drop all fears, there is nothing to be afraid of. There is no hell, don’t be worried about it; and there is no heaven, so don’t become greedy for it. All that is, is herenow. This moment contains all hell, all heaven. And it depends on you: if you enjoy, rejoice. If you are in deep love with life, if you can celebrate, you are in paradise. If you cannot enjoy, if your sources of celebration have been poisoned, if you have such heavy chains on your feet and your hands and you cannot dance with life, then you are in hell.

A parish priest saw Muldoon, who had recently got married, in church after a long absence. Speaking to him later, the priest said,
“I believe your wife has brought you back to your religion.”
“That’s right,” said Muldoon. “I did not believe in hell till I married her.”

The priest, the politician, the pundit have created a hell here, and because they have created a hell you have started believing in hell. And the more you believe in hell, the more you participate in creating it.
This life has to be lived with as much joy as the birds are living it. Have you seen a bird on the wing? Just joy on the wing! Or have you seen a rose opening its petals? Joy opening its petals. Have you seen a river rushing to the ocean? Joy rushing to the ocean. Except for man, have you ever seen misery anywhere? The trees are blessed because they don’t have these three poisoners; the birds are blessed. The snake in the Garden of Eden who poisoned Eve and Adam’s consciousness must have been all these three together: he must have been a politician, a priest, and a pundit. Beware of the snakes! And the problem is that they have dominated your mind so long that you don’t think they are enemies. In fact, on the contrary, people like me look like enemies – because they go against your conditioning.
The Prime Minister of India, Morarji Desai, goes on saying almost every day that if people follow me, society will be destroyed. Just the other day, the Education Minister of Maharashtra gave a statement to the newspapers that I cannot be allowed to remain in Pune – because if people listen to me and follow me, this society is going to be shattered. In a way they are right.
This society, this rotten society, needs to be destroyed. Only on the ruins of this society can another society arrive. Only on the ruins of this imprisoned consciousness can freedom be born. Man has to live in a new way. We have lived too long with these poisoners, and they have destroyed all that is beautiful, all that is valuable. They have destroyed the whole poetry of life. They have given you only toys and they have taken real things, all real things, away from you. They have given you words: you can go on chewing on words like God, love, but you don’t know what God is, you don’t know what love is. All that you know is fear, all that you know is money, power-politics, and you go on talking about prayer. That is mere talk.
In a way they are right: if people listen to me, this society is going to be destroyed. But this destruction is just an introduction to a new creation. Before something can be created, the old has to be destroyed.
Just the other day I was reading the Poona Herald. They had written an editorial against me. The main thing was that I am teaching an earthly religion, earthy. That is true, but that is not something against me, that is really a compliment. Yes, that’s exactly what I am teaching – this very earth the paradise, and this very body the buddha. I am teaching you that there is nowhere else to go. Don’t sacrifice the present moment for anything, for any philosophy, theology, for any politics, ideology. Don’t sacrifice your present moment for any nation, for any church, for any race. Don’t sacrifice your present moment, don’t sacrifice at all. Celebrate, and if you celebrate this moment, the next moment will become one of more celebration. And when slowly, slowly your whole life is a song, that is the transformation.
These ten thousand years, humanity has lived in a kind of nightmare, but now things have come to a climax and something is going to happen, something tremendously important is going to happen. Either man is going to die utterly… If you go on following the past, then you are doomed, or – and there is every possibility that humanity will not decide to commit suicide – there is every possibility that now things have come to such an end that humanity will decide to take a new route.
We have moved horizontally for too long. Now we have to move vertically. We have moved in time for too long, now we have to move in eternity. We have desired and been ambitious for too long, now we have to drop all desiring and ambition and we have to put our whole energy into the present moment, to make it a celebration.

A newly ordained priest was going to do missionary work in South America. When he was leaving home, the local parish priest offered to drive him to the airport.
The young priest was reluctant to accept the offer because the old parish priest was a notoriously bad driver. But he didn’t want to offend the old man and he agreed to go with him.
After a hair-raising journey, they arrived at Dublin airport.
“It is a long way to South America,” said the old priest.
“It is,” said his friend. “But the worst part of the journey is sure over.”

I can see a new dawn which is very close by. The night is so dark, true, but when the night is so dark, the dawn is very close by. I am preparing you for that dawn. The worst part of the journey is over.
But you cannot see that far. The moment you start seeing, you will be thrilled. Humanity is coming closer and closer every moment to a great revolution, a revolution of consciousness, a revolution from all old concepts into a new way of living.
Sufism can be immensely helpful because there have been people – they have always been there… Once in a while a person has escaped from the prison, has gone out of the prison and seen the open skies and the stars, and the joy of the sun and the wind and the rain, and has declared to the prison inmates, “Come out also!”
A Buddha came out, a Jesus, a Bahauddin, a Rumi. And Sufis have great messages for the future of man.
These stories are just ways of saying something in such a way that even a child can understand. Truth is always very simple. If you are not complicated, it is just like a small story told to a child. These stories are simple, but their significance is immense:
It is recorded that someone said to the great philosopher Saadi, “I wish for perception, so that I shall become wise.”
Saadi said, “Perception without wisdom is worse than nothing at all.”
First: Sufis use the word philosopher in a totally different sense than it has in the West. They use it literally. The literal meaning of philosophy is lover of wisdom. In fact, the word sophy and the word sufi come from the same root: sophia, wisdom.
In the West, the philosopher has become a totally different phenomenon. Due to the Greek influence, the philosopher lost his roots in existence and became more and more rational, became more and more speculative. And Western philosophy has grown out of the Greek experiment. Hence, Western philosophy has gone in almost the opposite direction from Sufism. It has become logic-chopping, great arguments about nothing, just hair-splitting.
And slowly, slowly Western philosophy has come to a dead end. Now it is nothing but linguistic analysis. It no longer thinks of great things, it is no longer concerned with God or truth or freedom or love, no, not at all. Its whole concern has become the meaning of words. When the Western philosopher thinks about God, he means that he will think about what the word God means. He is not concerned with the reality of God, he is concerned only with the word God – as if by analyzing the word fire you will come to know fire, or by analyzing the word bread your hunger will be satisfied. Western philosophy goes on thinking about the word – bread, God, love – and has completely forgotten that love is only a word, it is not the reality. It is only a symbol, it is a finger pointing to the moon.
Western philosophy goes on thinking about the finger – how long it is, how beautiful or not beautiful it is, black or white, and has completely forgotten that it simply points to the moon. You need not be concerned with the finger, you can forget about it. Look at the moon and forget the finger. But Western philosophy has become greatly skilled in thinking about the finger.
If you read the works of the greatest philosophers in the West – Bertrand Russell, Ludwig Wittgenstein, G. E. Moore – you will be surprised: just linguistic analysis. The reality is no longer any concern of philosophy.
So when this story says …the great philosopher Saadi… remember, it is not said in the same sense as when we say, “the great philosopher G. E. Moore,” no. It is in the same sense as when we say, “the great philosopher Jesus,” “the great philosopher Buddha,” “the great philosopher Lao Tzu.” It has the meaning of a wise man, and that is really the meaning of the word sophia: one who loves wisdom.
Saadi is also a great poet. That’s how it should be, it has always been so. Wherever wisdom has happened, poetry has also happened by the side, of its own accord. Poetry is a by-product of wisdom. I don’t mean that every wise man is going to write poetry. No, that is not needed – he lives poetry, his whole being is poetry. If you taste Buddha you will know what I mean; if you taste Jesus you know what I mean. Not that Jesus writes poetry – he is not a poet in that sense – but he lives poetry, each of his movements is poetic. Even on the cross, his last statement praying to God, “Father, forgive these people because they don’t know what they are doing,” is pure poetry. Only a poet can have that much heart.
Saadi is a great poet and a great philosopher, he is a wise man. And remember, by “wise man” I don’t mean a man who knows much, no. Knowledge has nothing to do with wisdom. Remember knowledge is a substitute, a false substitute for wisdom. Wisdom grows in your consciousness; knowledge is implanted in you, imposed on you. Knowledge you get from the universities, wisdom you get from life itself; no university can give it to you. You have to live life. Knowledge you can get from books, scriptures, teachers, experienced people, by your own life’s experiences; wisdom is a totally different phenomenon. Wisdom you get only if you are open, vulnerable to existence, in deep love with existence. Then an old, dead leaf falling from a tree will give you wisdom. It will show you the momentariness of life, it will give you a message of death. And the way it falls – so gracefully, so fearlessly – will also give you wisdom, that this is the way to die. In the morning the rose blooms and by the evening it has gone. Coming, it was joy, going, it is joy.
Wisdom comes from watchfulness – not by study but by awareness, not by concentration but by meditation. One has to be just open to this infinite splendor called life. One has to be open to the earth and to the sky. One has to be open to everything, each and everything. Without judgment, one has to be open; then wisdom comes.
If you judge, you prevent; if you choose, you prevent; if you condemn, you prevent; if you evaluate, you prevent. The man who wants wisdom to shower on him remains just a pure witness. Thoughtless, he looks; he is just a mirror, he reflects. He does not conclude, he is not in a hurry. He never gathers knowledge; he goes on learning. He goes on learning, but never gathers knowledge.
The knowledgeable person lives in his memory, in the past. The wise man lives in the present – not in his memory but in his awareness this very moment. Saadi is a wise man.
A man came to Saadi and said: “I wish for perception, so that I shall become wise.” Now, no one can become wise. It is not an effort. One can become knowledgeable; it is an endeavor, an enterprise. One can cultivate knowledge, one cannot become wise. Wisdom is not becoming, it is being. That has to be understood.
Becoming is a process of time: today you have this much knowledge, tomorrow you can have more, and the day after tomorrow, more and more and more. Wisdom is not a quantity. Knowledge is a quantity, so the quantity can be more or less. The student has less, the professor has more. But wisdom is never less or more; it is a quality. Buddha is wise, so is Mahavira, and so is Bahauddin, and so is Zarathustra. Now, you cannot say who is wiser, that is not possible. It is not a quantity, you cannot compare. They are all wise. Wisdom knows nothing of more or less.
But about knowledge that is possible. You can say, “This professor is more knowledgeable – he has three PhD’s. That professor is not so knowledgeable – he has only one PhD. This professor is more knowledgeable – he has published in many academic journals. He has written so much, so many books have been published. That man, the other man, is not so knowledgeable.”
Knowledge is a quantity, it can be compared. Wisdom is not a quantity, it is a quality. You cannot become wise. It is a sudden happening, it is not gradual. It is not that one moment you are wise, and another moment a little more, and a little more, and gradually one day you become perfectly wise. No, it happens instantly: it is a sudden enlightenment, it is a state of being. When you have dropped all knowledge, it happens. When you have come out of the prison that the society has created for you, it happens. When you are again a child, it happens.
Remember the words of Jesus: “Unless you are like a small child, you will not enter my Kingdom of God.” What does he mean? Unless you attain the same freedom that you were born with, “…you will not enter my Kingdom of God.” Drop all that the society has given to you: character, morality, the idea of good and bad, the division of body and soul, the split between the earth and heaven. Drop all that the society has imposed on you. Become innocent again, a clean slate, and suddenly you are wise.
Wisdom is something that happens like a sudden lightning. That is the meaning of enlightenment, satori, samadhi.
The man said to Saadi: “…I wish for perception, so that I shall become wise.” Now, he is asking a wrong question. But people are not aware of what they are saying, they go on using words. He has heard, he is using words. He does not know with whom he is talking. He is not even aware that he is facing a buddha. Saadi is an enlightened man, but the man is talking in the same way, in the same gibberish, that he has been speaking to other people. He is perfectly unaware of whom he is talking with.
I have heard…

A lady went into a pet shop to buy a bird. She saw one that interested her. “What kind of bird is that?” she asked the salesman.
“That is a crunch-bird,” he replied. “Let me show you what he can do.”
“Crunch-bird, my paper!” the man ordered. The bird flew down and in one gulp ate the sheet of paper.
“Crunch-bird, my pencil!” The crunch-bird swooped down and swallowed the pencil.
“He is wonderful!” said the lady. “I will buy him.”
The lady brought the bird home. Her husband looked at the bird and wondered what kind of bird it was. He had never seen a bird quite like it before.
“That, my dear,” the wife boasted, “is a crunch-bird.”
The husband scratched his head, “Crunch-bird?” he said. “Crunch-bird, my foot!”

Talking to a Buddha, or to a Saadi, or to a Bahauddin, you should be a little more alert about what you are saying. You should be very careful of what words you are using. And if you are really careful and alert you may not use any words. You may simply bow down, you may simply put your head at the feet of Saadi and wait there for him to say something to you – because what can you ask? Out of your confusion only a confused question will arise. What can you ask out of your unclarity, out of your ignorance, darkness? What can you ask?
It is said, when a disciple of Buddha went to see Buddha for the first time…

He was a great scholar, one of the very well-known in India in those days; his name was Sariputra. When he went to Buddha for the first time, he went with five hundred disciples, his own disciples; they were all great scholars. He was a well-known Brahmin and he was much known for his debates. He had the capacity to defeat anybody. He used to roam around the country with his disciples, quarreling, debating, discussing, defeating other scholars. He was victorious in his art, nobody had yet been able to defeat him.
His disciples were very thrilled that now they were going to defeat Buddha. Sariputra could defeat anybody. They knew it, they had seen it happen again and again, but they were not aware of what was going to happen. The moment Sariputra saw Buddha he started crying, tears came into his eyes. The disciples were bewildered: they could not believe it, they had never seen such a thing. Sariputra was a very arrogant scholar, roaming around the country defeating every kind of philosopher, imposing his philosophy. Crying? A great silence descended. Even Buddha’s disciples could not believe it. They were also waiting: “There is going to be a great debate and discussion.”
Sariputra bowed down, put his head at Buddha’s feet and remained there. Buddha asked him, “Do you want to ask anything, Sariputra?”
He said, “No. Seeing you, all questions have disappeared. I want to be here with you. If some day you feel that I am worthy and you would like to say something to me, you can say it. But if you don’t say anything, then too I will be contented. I am contented. Seeing you, I have seen all that is worth seeing.” This is the way to approach a man who is wise.

The man said to Saadi: “…I wish for perception so that I shall become wise.” Saadi said, “Perception without wisdom is worse than nothing at all.” What is he asking for in the name of perception? He is asking for knowledge, he is asking for the capacity to see more, to know more. He thinks that wisdom can be caused by something – by perception, by knowledge, by the capacity to see.
Wisdom is not caused by anything, wisdom is already the case. You were born wise, wisdom is your nature. All that is needed is to drop the pretensions that you have cultivated. All that is needed is to rediscover. It is already there, somewhere deep down, hidden behind all kinds of rubbish that has continuously been poured into you by the parents, by the teachers, by the professors, by everybody around you.
All kinds of nonsense are being poured into every child; it becomes piled up. You call it your ideology, your philosophy, your religion – your communism, your Christianity, your Hinduism. It is just junk! And deep down, hidden behind it, is the real treasure. It has only to be rediscovered.
Saadi said, “Perception without wisdom is worse than nothing at all.” Knowledge can be dangerous if you are not wise. That’s what is happening in the world: people become knowledgeable, and their life loses all meaning. Just go and see the knowledgeable people – they are the most lost, they feel life to be absolutely meaningless. They cannot feel any joy. They are continuously wondering why they are alive at all: “Why not commit suicide?” Maybe they are cowardly and cannot commit suicide, but they are not able to answer why they are living, for what. They don’t feel any purpose anywhere. Life seems to be accidental, unnecessary. They can’t see the point where they are needed in any way. They are feeling uprooted. The more knowledgeable a person is, the more he feels uprooted.
Knowledge does not lead to wisdom, knowledge leads to madness. Knowledge does not lead to enlightenment, it leads to deeper and darker unconscious realms of your being. Knowledge takes all celebration away from your life – it destroys all poetry, all song, all dance. It makes you serious.
Wisdom knows how to laugh, knowledge cannot laugh. Knowledge is always serious, wisdom is playful. Wisdom knows how to live, how to love, how to laugh. Wisdom is light, knowledge is heavy. You cannot attain wisdom through knowledge.
That’s what the person is asking, and that’s what everybody is thinking: “If I gather a little more knowledge I will be wiser.” You will not be; you will be less wise. The more you know, the less you will know. Socrates was right when, at the end of his long life, he said, “I know only one thing – that I know nothing.” This is wisdom.
Knowledge creates specialists who know more and more about less and less, and finally end up by knowing all about nothing. Wisdom is a totally different dimension: it is the dimension of being, not of becoming.
The man asked Saadi:
“How can that be?”
You say ignorance is better than knowledge without wisdom.
“How can that be?”
Saadi said, “As in the case of the vulture and the kite. The vulture said to the kite, ‘I have far better eyesight than you. Why, I can see a grain of wheat down there on the ground, while you see nothing at all.’
“The two birds plummeted down to find the wheat, which the vulture could see and the kite could not. When they were quite near the ground the kite saw the wheat. The vulture continued his dive and swallowed the wheat. And then he collapsed: for the wheat was poisoned.”
That’s how it has happened: man has collapsed because of his knowledge. First his inner world was destroyed by knowledge and knowledgeability, and now scientific knowledge is destroying nature. First we have destroyed the inner by so-called religious knowledge, now we are destroying the outer by so-called scientific knowledge. The inner ecology has been destroyed by the priests, and the outer ecology is being destroyed by the technologists. Man is collapsing.
We are living in the most significant time ever – because it is a time of great collapse. Either humanity disappears or a totally new way of life arrives. These moments are very critical, it is the greatest crisis man has ever encountered. Religion has destroyed half of the world, the inner world, and science is destroying the other half.
We need a totally different kind of religion and a totally different kind of science – a science which helps ecology. And we need a totally different kind of religion – a religion which gives you freedom, not slavery, which helps you to be yourself, which is not an imposition.
Science is a rape on nature, and religion has been a rape on your inner consciousness. Both have failed, both have been destructive.
A new vision is needed. It was never needed as much as it is needed now – because the time is very limited. We are sitting on a pile of atomic weapons. The capacity to destroy this earth is so vast that you cannot even imagine for what we have gathered such a capacity to destroy. It is a thousandfold: every man, every single man, can be killed one thousand times, one thousand earths can be destroyed. We have piled up that much capacity to destroy, and we go on piling more up every day. It may be a communist country or a capitalist country, it makes no difference; each country is trying to put all its energy into war, into destruction.
Even a country like India, which boasts of being nonviolent and all that jazz, is greatly desirous of having atomic weapons. Even a country like India, which thinks and claims and boasts that it is a religious country, puts seventy percent of its energy into war efforts. People are dying, starving, and the Gandhians, who have been the rulers of this country for three decades, go on piling up more and more weapons – and they go on talking about nonviolence. It is such an absurd world. It is so ridiculous! You have to be aware of it, you have to be very, very alert to it. We are sitting on a volcano, our own, manufactured, made by ourselves; it can erupt at any moment. Before it erupts we have to find a new science and a new religion.
In fact, the new science and the new religion will not be two separate things. They are separate because of the division created in you: the body and the soul, this world and that, inner and outer, man and woman, day and night. Because of these divisions, science and religion have been in conflict – because your body and your soul have been in conflict. The new religion and the new science will not be two separate things, it will be one thing. You can call it religio-science or anything you wish, but it will be one thing. It has to be one because man is one. The outer and the inner are not in conflict, they are aspects of the same coin.
If man is wise, he will have a different kind of world, more natural in every way, more harmonious, more poetic. Both the outer and the inner need great change. Both have suffered much, but they can be revived because they are eternal. Even though much poisoning has been going on, that poison can be dropped out of the system, the system can still be purified. Still there is hope.
It is out of my hope that I am creating you, my sannyasins. It is out of my hope that I am creating a new kind of consciousness, where religion and science can meet, where East and West can meet – there should be no East and no West in the future – where all dualities disappear and the nondual is felt. That nondual is God.
But you can know that nondual, that God, only if you come out of your prison. Come out, wake up: you can. Nobody can hinder you except yourself. You will have to drop a few comforts, a few conveniences, but it is worth it – because once you have known the real joys of life, you will never regret that you had to drop those false toys.
But before you have known the real, it is really difficult. Trust is needed. And that is the function of a master, to create trust in you. I cannot give you freedom because freedom cannot be given by its very nature. And a freedom that is given can be taken away at any moment, so it is not of any worth. I cannot give you freedom. In fact, you don’t need it, you have it deep inside. It is still alive, it just has to be searched for, found. I can give you trust, I can help you to gain confidence.
Your confidence has been taken away. You have been made afraid, you have been forced to tremble in fear. In your temples you are doing nothing but trembling, and you call it prayer. You are simply afraid, and out of fear you create gods. They are not gods, they are just shadows of your fear. And out of your misery you create paradise. That is just a consolation.
The real God cannot be attained through fear. The real God is attained only through love, but love is possible only in one way: love is possible only in freedom. The slave cannot love, and the slave cannot be wise either. Drop your slavery. You have nothing to lose except your chains, and you have everything to gain, the whole world to gain.
You don’t know how much you are missing. You don’t know what compassion arises in buddhas when they look at you – because they can see what you can be, and what you have become. They can see a great dance that can happen in you, they can see a golden flower that can bloom in you.
But you don’t have any idea of a golden flower. You don’t have any idea of your being a god. You don’t have any idea that the kingdom of God is within you. You are an emperor who has fallen asleep and dreams that he is a beggar. Wake up. You can go on accumulating knowledge in your dream; that is not going to help. Wake up. Wake up! Only then will you be wise.
Wisdom is nothing but wakefulness. Wisdom is an awakening.
I can give you trust. I can allow you to fall in tune with me and to have a little taste of what is possible. And that taste is satsang, that taste is communion between the master and the disciple. And once even a single drop of that nectar has fallen on your tongue you will never be the same: you will be in constant rebellion, you will destroy all prisons. You will have to come out under the sky. And the benediction is great; you cannot even imagine. It is sat chit anand – it is truth, it is consciousness, it is bliss.
God is not a person, but the experience of bliss, truth, and consciousness. God is this whole existence in utter celebration. You have only fallen out of line. Fall in step.
So what can you do? Saadi says that by attaining more knowledge or perception, nothing is going to happen. I say the same to you. I am not here to impart more knowledge to you. I am here to make you alert, to shock you into wakefulness.
When the heart is awake and becomes a flame of light, you know the meaning of life and the significance of it – and it is great. Then gratefulness arises. Then the sheer gift of life is enough to be contented with forever and forever.
Enough for today.

============================================================

The first question:
Osho,
The Navabharat Times of October 13th carried a news item from Surat, Gujarat, according to which, the Prime Minister, Morarji Desai, said that he had read your book From Sex to Superconsciousness and found it indecent and distasteful. He also objected to you being called Bhagwan. Would you please comment?
Anand Maitreya, sex is a natural phenomenon, as natural as a roseflower, or dewdrops on the grass leaves in the early morning. And it is the most beautiful phenomenon too, as beautiful as the calling of a cuckoo, as beautiful as the stars in the sky. But down the ages it has been condemned.
Condemning sex has been one of the most important strategies to dominate man. The moment you condemn sex, you have condemned life itself. Life arises out of sex, life is an expression of sex. If you can find God anywhere, utterly present, it is the moment of sexual orgasm. But to condemn sex is a great strategy. Through it you indirectly condemn man, you poison his very source of being. Then he feels guilty, a sinner, worthless, and it is easy to dominate him, it is easy to manipulate him, it is easy to exploit him – and that’s what the politicians and the priests have been doing.
They don’t want man to have freedom, they don’t want man to enjoy life because a man who is blissful is rebellious. A man who is enjoying his life cannot easily be dominated – it is very difficult to dominate him – and cannot easily be deceived because he has clarity.
Shree Morarji Desai is a very repressed person as far as sex is concerned. Now, this seems very strange. My discourses have been collected in two hundred books – books on Vedanta, books on Tao, books on Yoga, books on Sufism, books on the Upanishads, books on the Gita, the Bible, the Tao Te Ching – but he has been reading only one book: From Sex to Superconsciousness. An eighty-three-year-old man who has remained celibate for almost fifty years, why should he be interested in the book, From Sex to Superconsciousness? Certainly he is not interested in superconsciousness because I have written two hundred books on superconsciousness. His interest seems to be sex. That’s how it happens.
I have read his autobiography. In his autobiography he remembers that when he was young he went to see the Mother of Shree Aurobindo’s ashram. She was a beautiful woman. Before she went to Shree Aurobindo, she was an actress; she had grace and a charisma of her own. And she was moving deep into spirituality. But what did Morarji Desai see in her? What he saw shows much about him, not about the Mother.
The Mother’s disciples were coming to touch her feet, and sometimes a disciple would get so ecstatic just by touching her feet that he would start rolling, and sometimes his head would fall into the Mother’s lap. And Morarji was horrified. He thought in his mind, “So that’s why they are looking so ecstatic, just rolling in her lap. Her shapely, beautiful thighs…” That’s what he saw. He went away: “This is not spirituality. These people are sex-obsessed. This is a vulgar expression of sexuality.” That’s all that he saw in the Mother and the disciples, he could not see anything more.
And that was when he was young. Now fifty years have passed, and fifty years’ constant repression of sex has become a wound in him. He is boiling within with sexuality.
When I read this question from Anand Maitreya, I was reminded of a few stories I would like to tell you…

“It is an outrage the way those nudists are carrying on in that apartment,” the old woman told the policeman when he answered her call. “I am ashamed.”
The cop looked out of the window and could see nothing but a vast courtyard, a road, and an apartment building in the distance. “I can’t see a thing,” he shrugged.
“Of course you can’t,” the old woman replied. “But just have a look through these binoculars and you will see plenty.”

What he has seen in the book From Sex to Superconsciousness is nothing but his own mind reflected in it. There is nothing indecent, but the very idea of sex creates the feeling of indecency in his mind. Maybe the very word sex revives something in him that has been repressed, that he has been sitting upon. The very word must be creating a ripple. All those repressed feelings and instincts must be surfacing. That’s why he thinks it is indecent. It depends on him.
There are people who go to Khajuraho and think it is indecent. It is not. It is one of the most beautiful and one of the most spiritual temples in the world. If you look into those stone statues, yes, both things are present. Those statues represent the lowest and the highest: they go from sex to superconsciousness. But the person who is obsessed with sex – and all repressive persons are obsessed – will not be able to see anything other than sex. He will miss the real point. The real point is in the faces, in the eyes turned upward, in those beautiful faces in which orgasmic ecstasy has been sculptured. The stones have become sermons.
It depends on how you have lived. Have you lived a life of affirmation? Then you will be able to see. If you have lived a life of negation, it will be impossible for you to see.
An ancient Sufi parable…

Jalal, an old friend of Mulla Nasruddin’s, called one day. The Mulla said, “I am delighted to see you after such a long time. I am just about to start on a round of visits, however. Come, walk with me and we can talk.”
“Lend me a decent robe,” said Jalal, “because, as you see, I am not dressed for visiting.” Nasruddin lent him a very fine robe.
At the first house Nasruddin presented his friend. “This is my old companion, Jalal. But the robe he is wearing, that is mine!”
On their way to the next village, Jalal said, “What a stupid thing to say: ‘The robe is mine.’ Indeed! Don’t do it again.”
Nasruddin promised.
When they were comfortably seated at the next house, Nasruddin said, “This is Jalal, an old friend, who has come to visit me. But the robe, the robe is his!”
As they left, Jalal was just as annoyed as before. “Why did you say that? Are you crazy?”
“I only wanted to make amends. Now we are quits.”
“If you do not mind,” said Jalal, slowly and carefully, “we shall not say any more about the robe.” Nasruddin promised.
At the third and final place of call, Nasruddin said, “May I present Jalal, my friend. And the robe, the robe he is wearing… But we must not say anything about the robe, must we?”

Once you are trying to repress a thought, it comes up again and again and again. Morarji Desai is not only obsessed with sex in this life, he will remain obsessed even in coming lives. His whole approach is unscientific, unnatural. He has not been able to understand what he is doing. He has not been able to see – how can sex be indecent? Certainly he is not born out of a virgin mother. Certainly his children are born out of his sexual relationship with his wife. But because of his obsession he has even been very hard with his children.
One of his daughters committed suicide, and it is just because of his obsessively puritan mind. He has been hard upon himself and hard upon his children too.
The person who is obsessed with something unnatural is perverted. And through this obsession he loses all intelligence. Intelligence grows out of being natural. Intelligence is a shadow of being natural and spontaneous. The perverted person is bound to become stupid because he is constantly fighting within himself. His whole energy becomes a kind of civil war. The person who is fighting nature is indecent, and the total outcome is stupidity.
I don’t see any indecency in sex – because this is how God has chosen to create life. Sex is his method. Just as a painter paints with his brush, God has been creating this existence with sexual energy. To deny sex, to condemn sex, is to condemn God. If you call sex indecent, you are calling God indecent because this whole existence is nothing but an expression of sexual energy.
These birds chirping, singing: do you think they are praising Prime Minister Morarji Desai? This is sexual expression. The whole poetry of life consists of sexual energy. The whole beauty… What is beauty? The very feeling that something is beautiful comes out of sexual energy.
A woman looks beautiful to you. Why? Why does the call of the cuckoo from the mango grove sound beautiful to you? Why? It is, deep down, an expression of sex, love.
But people like Morarji Desai live without love. In fact, a politician cannot afford to be loving. He cannot live, he cannot love, he cannot laugh.
I have heard a story about him. I don’t know how far it is correct. It is a joke – and jokes need not be correct, but they are always true…

Morarji Desai was having his photograph taken by a press cameraman. The photographer had a lot of trouble trying to get his subject to pose properly. Eventually, after much bickering, he was about to take the picture.
“Look pleasant for a moment,” said the photographer. “Then you can resume your normal expression.”

He cannot laugh, laughter must be indecent. He cannot take life playfully, playfulness must be indecent.
And this man has written a story on Krishna. Now the story is going to be filmed – not that he is a great author, but just because he is the Prime Minister. So now the story is going to be filmed. I am puzzled, surprised, at what he must be thinking about Krishna. His whole life must be looking indecent to him – because Krishna’s whole life is love, playfulness, joy, celebration.
What does Morarji Desai think about this incident in Krishna’s life…?

A few beautiful women were taking their bath in the Yamuna River – and this is not a story of today, it is a story from when India was alive. Five thousand years ago, when India was really vibrant, when people were courageous enough to love and laugh and dance, when people were not life negative, but when life was thought to be God and divine, and people were not talking about life as if it were indecent…
Krishna passed by. The women were taking their bath naked in the Yamuna River. Now no Indian woman would do that. Those days were beautiful, people were more open. Now this can happen only in my ashram, nowhere else. Krishna is still alive here.
Krishna saw those beautiful women swimming and floating in the water and enjoying, and they were completely unaware of his presence. He gathered their clothes, which were on the bank, and climbed a tree and sat there. When they were finished, those women looked around; their clothes were gone. They started searching. Then they saw Krishna sitting on the tree and all the clothes with him.

Now what does Morarji Desai think about this? Certainly I have never done anything like that! Krishna must look very indecent. It is not that Krishna is indecent. It is just Morarji Desai’s sexual perversion.
And he says that he found it distasteful. That too is strange. A man who goes on drinking his own urine, and has not yet found that distasteful… And I am certainly certain that he does not suffer from diabetes, otherwise the urine could have a little sweetness.
He found the book distasteful? What taste does he have? What is he talking about? What aesthetic sense does he have? He is the most unpoetic person alive in this country.
I have heard…

A gypsy and a hippie had an argument as to who could withstand foul smell longer. They decided to remain with a skunk in a small pen. First the gypsy went in. He ran out in desperation after a couple of minutes.
Then the hippie took his turn. After a minute, the skunk bolted!
The gypsy was puzzled. He asked, “How did you manage?”
The hippie said, “I am a follower of Morarji Desai. I live only on garlic and water of life.”

“The water of life” is a euphemism for your own urine. This man thinks that my book is distasteful? He is simply saying something about himself, not about the book.
It always depends on you, how you interpret what you read. He must have read my book, but he must have understood in his own way, he must have interpreted it in his own way. The interpretation is indecent. What he has read into it is his own mind. If an ugly man faces a mirror, the mirror cannot be blamed for his ugliness. And calling the mirror ugly won’t do.
The book From Sex to Superconsciousness must have functioned as a mirror. He must have become agitated because if that book is right, his whole life has been stupid, and stupidly wasted. He must have felt very antagonistic, hurt in his ego. He has been struggling with sex, fighting with sex, his whole life – and now here I am, saying that without a deep experience of sex you will never know love, and without a deep experience of love you will never know prayer. And here I am, saying that sex is the first experience of God. And here I am, saying that without moving into life with totality, you will never come to know the innermost core of it.
Nothing has to be denied because whatever is denied will take its revenge. That’s what is happening to him. He is not angry at me, he is angry at a mirror because the mirror is showing his face.
I have heard…

A very rich woman, but very ugly too, asked a great painter, Picasso, to make a portrait of her. Picasso was hesitant. He wanted to say no, but it was difficult. The woman was ready to pay any price. He asked a fantastic price, thinking she would say no and he could get out of it, that there would be no need to paint the woman’s face.
But she said, “Yes, start.”
So he painted the portrait. It was just a blob of colors.
When the woman came, she said, “What? You have not done a good job. Is this my portrait?”
He said, “What can I do, madam? I wanted to get out of it. Nature has not done a good job. What can I do? I cannot improve upon nature. I am here to paint you just as you are. That’s why I was very reluctant. I am just a mirror.”

I have received thousands of letters, from all kinds of people, saying that they have been immensely benefited by the same book that Morarji Desai says is indecent. But sex is too much on his mind.

A monk consulted a psychiatrist for help with various problems.
The analyst said, “Stretch out here on the couch. Just relax and tell me about your early life. Just keep on talking. Say anything that comes to mind.”
The monk proceeded to spill out his life story.
Suddenly the analyst took out a big balloon and sitting behind the patient, blew it up to full size. Then he stuck a pin in it. The balloon burst with a loud crash.
The patient was startled.
The doctor said sharply, “Now tell me, quick, what did you think about when you heard the loud explosion?”
“I thought of sex.”
“Sex? At such a moment? You thought about sex?”
“Well,” said the patient, “what is so surprising about that? It is all I ever think about.”

A monk is a monk, and a monk always thinks about sex. The more he escapes from the world and its reality, the more he fantasizes about it. Morarji Desai has remained a monk. He has not known the beauties of existence, and he is angry with me because my very presence makes him aware that his life has been a wastage.
And the second thing you say, “He also objected to you being called Bhagwan.” I am Bhagwan, just as you are Bhagwan. Even Morarji Desai is a bhagwan. Bhagwan does not mean somebody sitting there high in the heavens. Bhagwan simply means that which is hidden behind you, within you, that which you are. I am Bhagwan because I have recognized it. I am not calling myself Bhagwan – I am.
You are also, but you have not yet gathered courage to recognize the fact. It needs guts to recognize your reality. It needs utter humbleness to see things as they are. It needs simplicity of the heart to call things what they are.
Morarji Desai is also a bhagwan, just as everything else is, trees and rocks and animals. God is not separate from existence, God is immanent in it. Only God is. If only God is, then I am God, then you are God, then everything is divine. But God can be fast asleep. That’s what Morarji Desai is: a God fast asleep, dreaming that he has become the Prime Minister, snoring.
Wake up! But it is very difficult to wake up when you are a prime minister because then you are afraid – if you wake up and find that it was only a dream… You have invested too much in the dream.
I have heard…

A man was telling to his friend, “Last night I dreamed such a beautiful dream.”
The man to whom he told it said, “But you look very sad. If you have dreamed a beautiful dream, why you are looking so sad, so gloomy?”
The first man said, “There is a reason. In the dream I saw the Pope, and I was surprised when he asked me, ‘What would you like? A little whiskey?’ I was taken aback. But I said, ‘Yes sir.’ ‘I love whiskey, you know,’ he said. He asked, ‘Hot or cold?’ I said, ‘Hot.’
“So he went in his kitchen and started to make the whiskey hot. I waited and waited, and by the time the whiskey was hot, the dream was finished. That’s why I am feeling sad. Next time I will say, ‘Cold, as it is, immediately, give it to me. Do nothing, no need to do anything, just give it to me as it is.’”

When you have a dream, a sweet dream, it is very difficult to listen to people who are shouting, “Wake up!” That’s why it is very difficult for people who have succeeded in life to wake up. Their very success becomes their curse. They think they are doing perfectly well.
Have you not watched it in your dreams? If you are having a sweet dream it continues, if you are having a nightmare it wakes you up. If somebody is going to kill you and is just chasing you with a bayonet, a moment comes when you simply wake up, perspiring of course, but you wake up. A nightmare is good in that sense, that it wakes you up. But if you are having a beautiful dream – you are Krishna, and all the beautiful women of the world are dancing around you like your gopis, girlfriends – who wants to wake up? One only hopes that this dream continues.
Morarji Desai is as divine as I am, but God is fast asleep and snoring. Why should he be angry if I am being called Bhagwan? What has that to do with him? But many people are angry, and the anger has some rationale in it. The rationale is that if somebody is awakened, his very presence disturbs your sleep. You cannot sleep as comfortably as before. Somebody is awakened – so is all that you are going into a dream? You start feeling annoyed with the person who is awake. You start finding reasons why he must be wrong: “Why does he call himself God?”
And that too from an Indian! It looks very absurd. It’s okay if Christians, Mohammedans, and Jews raise the question of why I call myself God – because they have no insight into the phenomenon as deeply as it has happened in this country. Buddha never believed in God, never, but we have still called him Bhagwan. Mahavira never believed in God; we have still called him Bhagwan. So bhagwan cannot be translated as God.
God is the creator of the world – and certainly I have not created this world. I cannot take that responsibility, excuse me! I am not God in the Christian sense.
But Morarji Desai is not a Christian. One can expect that he should understand that bhagwan in the East does not mean God. It means “the blessed one” – and I declare myself the blessed one. It simply means that I have been blessed; that I have come to a point where I am utterly content; that I have come to a state where I don’t desire anything anymore, there is nothing to be desired, all is available; that I have come to a state where the mind is dissolved and I am one with existence. This is the state of the blessed one.
Bhagwan simply means one who has disappeared as a person and has become a presence. That’s why we could call Buddha Bhagwan, although he never believed in God the Creator.
And there are people, like Morarji Desai, whose anger is that I have declared it myself, that I am a self-appointed Bhagwan. But how else can it be? How can it be otherwise? Who can appoint me Bhagwan? Buddha declared himself; he was self-appointed, not that there was a committee or a university senate, or there was a vote in the country. Politicians can’t think of anything else other than votes. He must be thinking about who has voted for me, how am I Bhagwan, how many people have voted for, and how many against?
Who voted for Krishna? Who voted for Mahavira and Buddha? Who voted for Christ? If Christ’s godhood depended on votes, he would have lost his deposit! He had not more than a hundred disciples, not more than that. And the real disciples were only twelve, the others were just sympathizers. How did Jesus become Christ? Who appointed him? How did Krishna declare, “I am that”? How did Buddha declare, “I have arrived”? They were all self-appointed. There is no other way.
I have declared myself God. This is the only possible way because when I have become blessed, when I have known the ultimate joy of experience, of existence, when I have seen truth, who else is needed to certify it? Do I need a character certificate from the politicians? I have declared it. There is nothing wrong because that is the only way. If you have known love, only you can say you have known love.
I have known the ultimate samadhi, and only I can say it. Only a few people, those who have attained it, will be able to recognize it.
Morarji Desai is simply saying he cannot recognize it. But who is expecting him to recognize it? He has not known anything of meditation.
Just on the day he became Prime Minister, somebody asked him, “Are all your desires fulfilled?” He said, “No, one desire is still there. I want to know God.” The man said, “Then have you ever meditated?” – a journalist must have asked. And Morarji Desai said, “I have not done anything like meditation, although Osho has given me a meditation. But I could not do it – because I am too old and I cannot do such a vigorous meditation as he suggested.”
Now, he is not too old to become the prime minister of a country like India, which has only problems and problems and problems, and nothing else. And he is ten years older now than when I had talked to him and given him a meditation. Then he was only seventy-three, now he is eighty-three, but he says he is too old to meditate. But he is not too old to become the prime minister of a country and to take the whole burden of it.
Rationalization and nothing else. If you don’t want to meditate, you can always find reasons. Whatever you want to do, you are ready to do it.
He goes on running from one country to another country; he goes on traveling all over the country; he goes on fighting with other politicians, quarreling – and everything is done perfectly well. He has enough energy for all that. Just for meditation…? It is a twenty-four-hour job that he is doing, and meditation is to be done only for one hour. But he says he is too old for meditation.
He has not known anything of meditation; how can he know anything of what has happened in me, to me? Yes, I declare myself Bhagwan – because I declare this whole world is bhagwan. This whole world is blessed. If you don’t recognize the blessings that are being showered on you by existence, that is your responsibility; nobody else is responsible for it. I am open to all the blessings. That’s all I mean when I say I am Bhagwan: that I have no barriers, that I am in a state of let-go, that I am utterly open. Whatever existence wants me to do I will do, and whatever existence does not want me to do, I will not do. I am utterly annihilated. Fana fi’llah: I am absorbed in God, in this totality. That’s what I mean by the word God. And the moment this happened, fana fi’llah, I became baqa bi’llah, I became suddenly all. I am in the shape of the tree, I am in the rays of the sun. Just as I am in this body, I am in you too.
Now, this is my experience. I don’t need any witnesses for it. Even if the whole world says it is not so, it is still so. It does not depend on you or your votes. But the politicians can’t think of anything else, they only think of votes.
Why should he be puzzled, worried about me? He goes on constantly talking about me, as if I am haunting him. He does not know what has happened to me, and what can happen to him. He has read the scriptures, he can quote the scriptures; but all that that he quotes is utterly borrowed. It is not his own.

One day, a lady who owned a very intelligent parrot discovered a leaky pipe in her kitchen. She called the plumber, but before he arrived she had to leave the house momentarily on an errand. During her absence the plumber came along and rang the doorbell.
“Who is it?” called the parrot.
“It is the plumber,” he said.
“Who is it?” repeated the parrot.
“It is the plumber!” he shouted.
“Who is it?” said the parrot.
“It is the plumber! It is the plumber!” he screamed, and in his frustration he collapsed right on the doorstep with a heart attack.
On returning home, the lady found him lying there. “Good heavens,” she said. “Who is it?”
“It is the plumber,” said the parrot.

What Morarji Desai knows about scriptures is just parrotlike. What I am saying to you has arisen in me. I am a witness to Buddha and to Krishna and to Christ and to Zarathustra and to Lao Tzu and to all those who have become awakened.
But deep down his anger has another reason too. Indira Gandhi has always liked my thoughts; she has always been in a kind of love toward my way of thinking. That is the deep root of why he is angry with me. Indira has the intelligence to understand me, more than he has, and Indira has a kind of receptivity and grace, and Indira also has guts and the courage to take some revolutionary steps – which are utterly needed.
It is because of her revolutionary steps that she lost the last elections. The masses behave in a very suicidal way. The logic has to be understood. The masses are suffering because of a certain conditioning. India has suffered in the past and is suffering now because of a certain mind. Now, anything to change the situation, to change this suffering, will basically need a change in the conditioning of the masses. That is the problem. Everybody wants to get out of this suffering state, this continuous starvation. People are ill, hungry, dying, but if anything can change this situation, the first requirement will be that we change our ways of thinking. And that is difficult for the masses.
They have lived with a certain kind of mind, they have cherished that mind for centuries, and they are utterly unaware that their mind is the cause of their suffering. They want to change the outer situation, but they are unaware that the outer situation exists in a certain collaboration with their inner mind. So whenever somebody wants to change the outer situation of the masses, their inner mind is going to be hurt and wounded, and they will not be able to forgive such a person. That’s what happened to Indira.
She really tried. She has been the most courageous Prime Minister that India has had in the past three or four decades. That was the problem: she started doing something really significant. But then the masses were angry; their traditions were broken, their conditionings were broken.
The masses were angry, and the politicians, the opportunists of this country, exploited the situation. But they have not been able to do anything – they cannot – because if they want to keep the masses satisfied they have to agree with the mind, and if you agree with the mind you cannot change the situation. This is the dilemma. The masses will vote only for those people who follow the mind of the masses, but then those people cannot do a thing. They will be utterly impotent.
That’s what has happened to Morarji Desai and his government. It is utterly impotent. It has not been able to do a single thing. It cannot. And the reason is, the next election is coming closer every day and if you do something that goes against the grain, you will be defeated. They know perfectly well how they have come into power; they have come into power because Indira tried to do something really revolutionary.
She was trying to impose compulsory birth control on the country. That is the only way it can be done. You cannot persuade the people, and if you persuade, it will take thousands of years to persuade them, and by that time there will be no point. In fact, this country has to have birth control within twenty-five years, otherwise it is doomed; by the end of this century it will not be possible for this country to exist at all. Everybody will be hungry and starving and ill; there will be no space left.
Things are in such a state that they can only be done compulsorily. Birth control is the only way to prevent this population from growing. If you wait for the masses to understand, and if you wait for them to be educated, it is not going to happen, ever. That’s what angered Indians. Hindus, Mohammedans, everybody was angered. They thought their freedom was being taken away.
It is not a question of freedom or no freedom now. It is a question of life and death! The country is moving every day toward the abyss. Things are becoming more and more ugly every day.
Indira tried in every possible way to speed up things. In India a bureaucracy exists which is only skillful in delaying things. In no other country does red-tapeism exist as much as it does in India. If you want to do a small thing, it will take years. The bureaucracy is so long and it moves so slowly, at an ant’s pace. Indira was capable of seeing that if this goes on, nothing is possible. Hence the bureaucracy became angry. Nobody wants to work, and Indira was forcing them to work.
The masses became angry because things were going against their mind. They have always enjoyed many children, and they think it is a gift of God. Now it is a curse, no longer a gift! Everybody boasts: “How many children I have!” It is thought to be very manly to have many children – you are very productive. India knows only one kind of creativity. Nobody asks how many poems you have written, nobody asks how many paintings you have done, nobody asks such things. Everybody asks, “How many children?” And when you can say, “Two dozen,” you are simply fantastic, great. That has been the only boast of the Indian male chauvinist. Now, he was very hurt.
And then, the bureaucracy was angry. They all joined together, with all kinds of opportunists. All the Indian political parties dropped their differences. Their differences are vast. They all dropped their differences because the real point is always how to attain power. Who bothers about ideologies? They dropped all their ideologies. They all gathered under the wing of Morarji Desai. Now, this Morarji Desai and his party have no ideology, no plan. They simply want to be in power.
If you simply want to be in power, you have to satisfy the masses the way they want to be satisfied – although their satisfactions are going to be suicidal. But who cares? Morarji Desai can remain the Prime Minister for at least five years: that is the real thing. Who bothers what is going to happen in the next century? That is not their business. Morarji Desai is certainly not going to survive that long, even if he goes on drinking the water of life. That is not his business. His whole business is how to remain in power.
He knows my attitude. I need this country to go through a great revolution. Indira is capable of it, Indira has all my blessings. That is the deep cause of why he is angry.
I am really happy that Indira Gandhi is trying to contest again, to enter the Parliament. Once she is in the Parliament, she will not remain too long out of power. It will be good that she is back in the Parliament. She is the only ray of hope – because she has guts. She can do things; she can risk. That’s what has happened: she risked all in trying to solve the problems that India is facing. She risked her Prime Ministership, she risked her life.
Because Morarji Desai knows this, he is, deep down, angry with me. His anger can be understood. But he should say it directly. No need to beat around the bush. Say it directly. For that, you need not bring sex in. That is an indirect way, a cunning way – because he knows the Indian mind is very repressive. Bring sex in, and the Indian masses are always with you; condemn sex and they are with you. Condemn life and they are with you – because that’s how they have been conditioned for centuries.
And the Indian masses are very much against anybody declaring himself Bhagwan because then a great competition arises. This has always been so. Mohammedans don’t want anybody to declare that he is a prophet of God. Why? – because if he is a prophet of God, then he is the latest prophet of God. Then Mohammed is just an antique model. Then Mohammed can be discarded. So they have decided that there will no longer be a prophet of God: Mohammed is the last.
Why? Has God gone bankrupt since then? Has he abandoned humanity since then? Has he nothing more to say to humanity? He stopped with Mohammed? Why? Why didn’t he stop before?
For Christians he stopped before, with Christ: he is the only begotten son. But why didn’t he stop before Christ? He stopped for the Jainas: he stopped with Mahavira, he is the last tirthankara. And so on, so forth. Each religion wants their prophet, their tirthankara, their messiah, their godman, to be the last. So whenever somebody becomes the blessed one and declares it, all other religions will be against him.
Now, Christians are angry with me: I must be a false prophet, the Devil incarnate, because Christ is the true master. Jainas are against me because there is no possibility of anybody else becoming a tirthankara.
I was born as a Jaina. The day I said I am the twenty-fifth tirthankara, they became angry. They said, “Twenty-fifth? But there is no mention of the twenty-fifth in the scriptures.” So I said, “We will write the scriptures again. How can they mention the twenty-fifth? The scriptures were written when the twenty-fourth was alive. Now we will write about the twenty-fifth – and I will make it a point that the twenty-sixth and twenty-seventh and so on, so forth, will be coming. God is not finished with me.”
How can God be finished? God is creativity. He will go on creating more and more buddhas. They will be coming, they will be coming forever and ever.
So Morarji Desai brings in two things. The real thing he hides – that is the way of a politician. But he brings in two other things, an indirect attack on me. First, he brings in sex. That is very easy to influence the Indian masses with. Just to tell them that this man supports sex, is not against sex, is enough, enough condemnation. Then he is against God, then he is irreligious, then he is materialist, he is earthy, and he is dangerous. Just mention one thing, that he is not unfavorable to the phenomenon of sex, and you have condemned him. Now no other proof is needed.
And then he brings in the second thing: why does this man call himself God, or is called God by his disciples? Don’t blame my disciples. I call myself God. How can they call me God? What do they know about God? I take the total responsibility on my own.
That will anger Hindus because they will think, “So this man is trying to compete with our Rama and Krishna.” And that will anger Jainas because they will think, “He is trying to compete with our Mahavira and Adinatha.” And it will anger Mohammedans and Christians and Parsis and Sikhs – and it will anger almost everybody in India! But I don’t care.

The second question:
Osho,
I want to know the meaning of aum.
This is a very significant question. First, aum is not a word, it is a pure sound, so it has no meaning as such. It is a pure sound, like the sound of a waterfall. What meaning does it have? – no meaning at all. Or the sound of this airplane passing by. What meaning does it have? – no meaning at all. A sound becomes a word when meaning becomes attached to it. A meaningful sound is a word, a meaningless word is a sound. So the first thing to be understood: aum is not a word, it is pure sound. All other words have arisen out of it, but it itself is not a word. It is the source of all sounds, it cannot have any meaning whatever.
The sound aum consists of three sounds: a, u, m. These are the seed sounds: all other sounds are created by a, u, m. All our words, the whole alphabet, is created by these three seed sounds: a, u, m. Aum is the source of all three.
That’s why aum is not written alphabetically in India. It has a symbol of its own. That is simply to designate: don’t be confused and don’t try to think about aum as a word. Aum is the only sound in India which is not written alphabetically. It is written pictorially, it has a picture, a symbol, which is outside the alphabet. These are symbolic things. It has been kept outside the alphabet because it is the source. The source is always out, beyond, transcendental.
Aum consists of three sounds and one anusvara. An anusvara is a very subtle sound; it represents a kind of humming. When you say, “au” and the prolonged “m,” the humming sound that goes on reverberating is the anusvara. An anusvara means just a dot; that too represents something. So aum consists of four things: three visible, a, u, m, and the fourth invisible, the rhythmic, humming shadow.
These four represent the whole of Indian metaphysics. A represents one state of the mind, when you are awake, the waking consciousness. U represents when you are dreaming, the dreaming consciousness. M represents when you are fast asleep, dreamlessly asleep – sushupti – deep, profound dreamless sleep. These are the three states of the human mind, human consciousness.
And the anusvara, the dot – that humming sound that goes on reverberating – represents the fourth, turiya, the transcendental state when you are neither asleep nor awake nor dreaming, when you are just a witness to all that is happening: the state of a Buddha or a Christ, the state where I am, where one can declare oneself Bhagwan.
Turiya… The word turiya means “the fourth,” simply “the fourth.” It has no other name because it cannot be named. It is beyond names. This has to be understood first.
Then the second thing: when you have reached the fourth state, turiya, when nothing is heard but a melody, the celestial music – what Pythagoras has called the music of the heavens, the music of the stars, the music that is the very undercurrent of existence… When you have reached the fourth state of awakening, awareness, buddhahood, you hear a music, a music which is not produced by any instrument.
Let me remind you of the Zen masters who tell their disciples to find the sound of one hand clapping. That is the music: one hand clapping. That is found only in the fourth. Why one hand clapping? You cannot produce music by one hand clapping; clapping needs the other. Two are needed to tang, two are needed to clash, two are needed to create something. If a child is born, two are needed, man and woman. Two are needed everywhere. Electricity needs the positive and the negative. Even life needs death as the opposite. So if you look into life, everything is dual; two are needed.
But beyond the two there is also a state, the transcendental, where two are not needed. It is called anahat nad: unstruck sound, one hand clapping. That sound is the very nature of existence. Existence is a subtle music – but it is heard only when you have reached the fourth state, when all thoughts have disappeared, where all unconsciousness has disappeared, where you are nothing but a pure mirror, mirroring nothing. Then suddenly a melody explodes.
That melody is called aum. It is not a mantra, as you have been told. Please never use aum as a mantra; don’t go on repeating, “aum, aum, aum.” If you repeat it you will miss something, you will become habituated.

A man fell from a ten-story building. A professor was passing by with his student. Of course he must have been a professor of philosophy.
He told the student, “Look at the situation. The man has fallen from ten stories and he has not been hurt. What do you call that?”
The student said, “It is coincidence.”
The professor said, “Now, if he goes back again to the tenth story and falls and is not hurt, then what will you call it?”
The student said, “That will be fate. Once, it is coincidence, but if he goes again and falls, that will be fate.”
And the professor said, “Okay. If he goes again, the third time, and falls from the tenth story, what will you call it?”
The student said, “Sir, then it will be habit. What else can it be?”

If you repeat aum continuously, year in and year out, it will become your habit. It will become a subtle layer around you; it will prevent you from hearing the real aum. The real aum cannot be produced by you.
That’s why I am against the so-called Transcendental Meditation of Maharishi Mahesh Yogi. It is very destructive. It is a lullaby; it only gives you good sleep, at the most. It can’t awaken you. It can cool you, it can give you a little calmness. It is good for people who are suffering from nervousness, tension, anxiety. It is a psychological device; it is a psychological drug, a nonmedicinal tranquilizer. But it is not meditation, no. It is neither meditation nor transcendental – it is not at all. It simply soothes you, consoles you, helps you to fall into good sleep.
And it is not accidental that America has become very interested in the so-called Transcendental Meditation of Maharishi Mahesh Yogi – because America is suffering tremendously from insomnia. People have lost their sleep. They want sleep at any cost, they are ready to try anything. And Transcendental Meditation can help you to have a good sleep.
But meditation is just the opposite. Meditation is waking up. It is not a lullaby, it is diametrically the opposite. It is a shock, it shatters your sleep and your dreams. If you are a beggar, you are no longer a beggar; it shatters the idea of your beggarhood. If you are a prime minister, you are no longer a prime minister; it shatters your illusion of being a prime minister. It shatters all identities. It simply reveals one fact, that you are God. It only reveals your reality and takes all illusions away.
Aum is not a mantra. Don’t use it as a mantra. It is a scientific formula, just like H2O. H2O is not water. You can go on repeating… When you are feeling thirsty you can sit and go on repeating, “H2O, H2O.” You can make a mantra out of it, and it may help you to fall asleep. Try it, and you will be surprised: H2O can do the same as any mantra. Just try, “H2O, H2O,” sway with it, “H2O, H2O” – go on, go on, faster and faster and faster – and soon you will be transported into deep sleep.
And when you awake, you will feel fresh, certainly fresh, but you will still be thirsty. It can’t help your thirst, it can’t quench it. Not that the formula is wrong, but a formula is not a mantra.
Aum is the H2O of spiritual transformation. It has all the secrets in it, but it is not something to be repeated. It has to be understood; so understand these things. First, aum is not a word; it is a pure sound, the purest, the ultimate sound of existence. When all is gone, that sound remains. That is the sound of soundlessness, the sound of silence.
And symbolically, aum represents your waking consciousness, your dreaming consciousness, your sleeping consciousness, and the beyond – the turiya – the fourth state, where one becomes Bhagwan, where one becomes Christ, Buddha, where one is one with the totality. It is a tremendously important formula; it contains the whole metaphysics of the East. But it is not a mantra. Please never repeat it. Repeating won’t help, it will deceive you. Try to understand it, and then start becoming more and more aware of your waking consciousness. Walking on the road, walk with full awareness, knowing that you are walking. Then slowly, slowly transform every act into awareness. De-automatize every act.

A man came to me. He had been suffering from chain-smoking for thirty years. He was ill and the doctors said, “You will never be healthy if you don’t stop smoking.”
But he was a chronic smoker; he could not help it. He had tried – not that he had not tried – he had tried hard, and he had suffered much in trying. But after one day or two days, again the urge would come so tremendously, it would simply take him away. Again he would fall into the same pattern.
Because of this smoking he had lost all self-confidence: he knew he could not do a small thing, he could not stop smoking. He had become worthless in his own eyes, he thought himself just about the most worthless person in the world. He had no respect for himself.
He came to me. He asked, “What can I do? How can I stop smoking?”
I said, “Nobody can stop smoking. You have to understand. Now smoking is not only a question of your decision. It has entered into your world of habits, it has taken roots. Thirty years is a long time. It has taken roots in your body, in your chemistry, it has spread all over. It is not just a question of your head deciding, your head cannot do anything. The head is impotent; it can start things, but it cannot stop so easily. Once you have started and once you have practiced so long, you are a great yogi: thirty years’ practice of smoking. It has become autonomous; you will have to de-automatize it.”
He asked, “What do you mean by ‘de-automatization’?”
That’s what meditation is all about: de-automatization.
I said, “Do one thing: forget about stopping. There is no need either. For thirty years you have smoked and lived; of course it was a suffering, but you have become accustomed to that, too. And what does it matter if you die a few hours earlier than you would have died without smoking? What are you going to do here? What have you done? So what is the point? Whether you die Monday or Tuesday or Sunday, this year, that year, what does it matter?”
He said, “Yes, that is true, it doesn’t matter.”
Then I said, “Forget about it; we are not going to stop it at all. Rather, we are going to understand it. So next time, make it a meditation.”
He asked, “A meditation out of smoking…?”
I said, “Yes. If Zen people can make a meditation out of drinking tea, and can make it a ceremony, why not? Smoking can be as beautiful a meditation.”
He looked thrilled. He asked, “What are you saying?” He became alive! He said, “Meditation? Just tell me – I cannot wait!”
I gave him the meditation. I said, “Do one thing. When you take the packet out of your pocket, go slowly for a moment. When you are taking the packet of cigarettes out of your pocket, move slowly. Enjoy it, there is no hurry. Be conscious, alert, aware. Take it out slowly, with full awareness. Then take the cigarette out of the packet with full awareness, slowly – not in the old hurried way, unconscious way, mechanical way. Then start tapping the cigarette on your packet – but very alertly. Listen to the sound, just as Zen people do when the samovar starts singing and the tea starts boiling, and the aroma. Then smell the cigarette and the beauty of it.”
He asked, “What are you saying? The beauty?”
“Yes, it is beautiful. Tobacco is as divine as anything. Even Morarji Desai is divine, so why not tobacco? Smell it; it is God’s smell.”
He looked a little surprised. He asked, “What, are you joking?”
“No, I am not joking.”
Even when I joke, I don’t joke. I am very serious.
“Then put it in your mouth, with full awareness, light it with full awareness. Enjoy every act, small act, and divide it into as many small acts as possible, so you can become more and more aware.
“Then have the first puff: God in the form of smoke. Hindus say, “Annam brahman – food is God.” Why not smoke? All is God. Fill your lungs deeply: this is a pranayam. I am giving you the new Yoga for the new age! Then release the smoke, relax, another puff… And go very slowly.
“If you can do it, you will be surprised: soon you will see the whole stupidity of it. Not because others have said that it is stupid, not because others have said that it is bad – you will see it. And the seeing will not be just intellectual. It will be from your total being, it will be a vision of your totality. And then, one day, if it drops, it drops; if it continues, it continues. You need not worry about it.”
After three months he came, and he said, “It dropped.”
“Now,” I said, “try it on other things too.”

This is the secret, the secret: de-automatize. Walking, walk slowly, watchfully. Looking, look watchfully, and you will see trees are greener than they have ever been and roses are rosier than they have ever been. Listen, somebody is talking, gossiping; listen, listen attentively. When you are talking, talk attentively. Let your whole waking activity become de-automatized and then you will be surprised. The moment it happens, your dream activity will have a new perspective. You will start becoming aware in your dreams.
Then start watching your dreams. That is a miracle when it happens. When you start watching your dreams, you are really a totally different person. Then the dreams have no impact on you. Watching your dreams, one day they disappear; you have de-automatized your dreaming process. Then you will be able to watch your dreamless sleep: you are asleep, and you are still awake. The whole body sleeping, every cell of it relaxed, the whole mechanism silent – and you are watching there, a silent witness.
When this third has happened, the fourth arises on its own: the humming sound. You are full of a new music. That music is God.
Enough for today.

============================================================

Bahauddin el-Shah, the great teacher of the Naqshbandi dervishes, one day met a confrere in the great square of Bukhara.
The newcomer was a wandering Kalandar of the Malamati: “The Blameworthy.” Bahauddin was surrounded by disciples.
“From where do you come?” he asked the traveler, in the usual Sufi phrase.
“I have no idea,” said the other, grinning foolishly.
Some of Bahauddin’s disciples murmured their disapproval of this disrespect.
“Where are you going?” persisted Bahauddin.
“I do not know,” shouted the dervish.
”What is good?”
By now a large crowd had gathered.
“I do not know.”
“What is evil?”
“I have no idea.”
“What is right?”
“Whatever is good for me.”
“What is wrong?”
“Whatever is bad for me.”
The crowd, irritated beyond its patience by this dervish, drove him away. He went off, striding purposefully in a direction which led nowhere, as far as anyone knew.
“Fools” said Bahauddin Naqshband. “This man is acting the part of humanity. While you were despising him, he was deliberately demonstrating heedlessness as each of you does, all unaware, every day of your lives.”
Man is unconscious, although he believes he is conscious. That very belief protects his unconsciousness. Man is ignorant, although he believes he knows. That very belief keeps the ignorance intact. Man is just the opposite of what he thinks he is. To understand this is the beginning of a great revolution.
To see where you are, what you are in actuality, needs courage. It is nice to believe in beautiful ideals. All ideals function only for one thing: they hide your reality. That’s why we go on creating beautiful ideals. Not that we are really interested in those great ideals; our real interest is how to hide the ugly facts.
People go on talking about nonviolence, and all that they do in their lives is violence, sheer violence and nothing else. The more violent they are, the more they talk about nonviolence. The talk about nonviolence becomes a camouflage.
This country has talked about nonviolence for centuries and it has not happened, and it is not going to happen because the very talk creates an illusion. And slowly, slowly you are not only capable of deceiving others, you start deceiving yourself. When you have talked for centuries about nonviolence you start thinking that you have become nonviolent. That is really the purpose of talking about nonviolence.
Just a few days ago the president of India stayed in a circuit house in Madras, and because he could not get nonvegetarian food there – meat, eggs, etcetera – he was very annoyed. If he had not been annoyed, the country may not have come to know that he is a meat-eater: a Gandhian and a meat-eater. And these are the people who go on talking about nonviolence.
They go to the samadhi of Mahatma Gandhi every year, ceremoniously, ritualistically. These are the people who have taken vows on the samadhi of Mahatma Gandhi, and they continue to eat meat, they continue to kill animals. What kind of nonviolence is this? But this is how man is: very deceptive, very cunning.
Those who are moving on the path have to be aware of this stupid ideological camouflage. It is very easy to have beautiful ideals. And you will be surprised if you watch people: if you know their ideals, you can be certain that they will be just the opposite of their ideals. Knowing their ideals, you can deduce logically that their life must be the very opposite of them. An ideal only proves that there is something they are hiding behind it.
A conscious person has no ideals at all. A conscious person lives through his consciousness. He is one, his inner and outer are not divided.
But all kinds of idealism divide the outer and the inner. They do not allow you to be natural, spontaneous; they force you to be something other than you are. They give you “shoulds” – you should do this, you should do that. Because of those shoulds you start believing that you are aspiring very high, that you are soaring very high – “Look at what beautiful ideals I have” – and behind that empty talk your reality is just the opposite.
The greedy person wants to become non-greedy. The angry person wants to become compassionate. The unloving person has the ideal of love. All the religions talk about love, and all that they do on the earth is create hate. All the nations of the world talk about peace, and all that they do is prepare for war. See it. This is what we have become: pseudo, hypocrites.
No nation prepares for peace – not even India, which is a nonviolent country, the great religious country. All nations talk about peace and prepare for war. War remains the reality and peace remains just smoke around it, to hide it.
Unless we see it through and through, there is no way to get out of it. Whenever you want some ideal to be fulfilled in your life, watch why. How can an angry person practice compassion? How? It is impossible. If the angry person practices compassion he will be, at the most, repressing his anger, that’s all. What else can he do? He has been angry with others, now he will be angry with his own anger, that’s all. The anger has taken a new form, a new shape.
The violent person wants to become nonviolent. What is he going to do? He has been violent with others, now he will become violent with himself. That’s what you call asceticism. Asceticism is basically masochism, it is the joy of torturing yourself. These people become great mahatmas, they are worshipped, but all that has happened is that their violence has turned inward. You torture others, they torture themselves – but the torture continues, and the pleasure in torturing continues.
Do you think a man who lies on the bed of thorns is religious? What is religious in it? He is simply torturing his body, but you will find people worshipping him. He is neurotic, but he will be thought of as a mahatma.
If it is cold and snow is falling and somebody is standing naked under the skies, what is he doing? He is simply torturing his body, but people will think, “What a great soul.” He simply needs a few electric shocks; he is psychiatrically ill, he is mad, he is suicidal.
It is very easy to catch hold of a murderer, it is very difficult to catch hold of a person who is suicidal. But both are murderers. They both enjoy violence.
That’s why Mahatma Gandhi’s violence is not visible. He is as violent as Adolf Hitler, the only difference is of direction. Mahatma Gandhi’s violence is invisible, he tortures himself.
If you keep somebody else hungry for many days, that will be violence, but if you keep yourself hungry and call it upavas, fasting, then it is something religious. It is not. It is the same game, and more dangerous – because when you keep somebody else in a state of torture he at least can defend himself, but when you start torturing your own innocent body, the body cannot defend itself. There is no defense possible, your own body is utterly helpless.
If you are violent with others the law can defend them, the police can defend them, but if you are violent with yourself there is no law against it. In fact, even the magistrate and the lawyer and the policeman will come and worship you: you are doing something beautiful. Man has remained in darkness because of such stupid ideas.
The first thing to be remembered is: a violent man cannot become nonviolent by effort. Is there no possibility then? Yes, there is a possibility, but it is not through effort, not through will, not through practicing being other than you are. The possibility is through becoming aware.
Rather than trying to be nonviolent, become aware of your violence, of how your violence functions. See the roots of it. Go deep into it, into how it arises, into how it permeates your being and your activities. Watch violence, and in the very watching, being aware of it, you will be surprised: it starts disappearing.
Nobody can be consciously violent. This is a fundamental law, the secret. Nobody can be consciously violent, so all that is needed is to bring consciousness, to become more conscious, to become more meditative. Nobody can be meditatively angry, that is not possible. At the most, you can act.
That’s what Jesus was doing when he took a whip and went into the temple and threw out the money-changers, started beating the money-changers, overturned their tables. That’s what he was doing – acting. It was just an act, a put-on act. A meditative person cannot be angry, that is impossible.
Meditation means you are so conscious of whatever you are doing that in that very consciousness, the quality of the doing changes. You need not have ideals. Ideals are simply postponing the revolution, the mutation.
Just a few days ago somebody asked me, “I feel I am stupid. What can I do to become intelligent?” Now, I had to tell him that if a stupid person tries to become intelligent, he will remain stupid. At the most he will become an intellectual, but never intelligent.
That’s how intellectual people are: hiding their stupidity behind words, knowledge, information. If a stupid person tries to be intelligent, how can he become intelligent? In the first place, he will be doing everything out of his stupidity – and when you do something out of your stupidity, your stupidity is going to be strengthened. But he can do one thing: he can gather information, he can gather knowledge, he can start having the illusion of knowing through knowledge. That’s how people become pundits, scholars, learned professors; that’s how it happens, but the stupidity remains. In their very foundation, the stupidity remains as an undercurrent. They just have a good show on the outside, deep down they are still stupid.
Then what to do? How to get out of stupidity? The only way is, watch your stupidity. Go into its working, its mechanism. Go into how you act, go watchfully into it. See it, how it is there, how it affects your behavior. Watch it in its multidimensional reality, and in that very watching you are becoming intelligent – because watching is intelligence.
And if you become really alert about your stupidity, the one who has become alert is no longer stupid. Stupidity is left out. You have become awareness, you have become a witness – and out of this witnessing another kind of life arises which has beauty, which has benediction, which has a grace of its own. But it is arduous to be watchful, it is easier to have ideals.
Drop all ideals. Don’t try to become somebody you are not. On the contrary, just watch whatever you are. Watch the fact, don’t create a fiction against it, otherwise you will always be divided. You will remain the fact and you will start believing in the fiction – that’s the meaning of hypocrisy. Your reality goes on persisting in the same way, and just on the surface you have a painted mask. That is not going to help, that has not helped humanity up to now.
The new man is possible only if we drop all kinds of idealism. Hindu, Christian, Mohammedan, Communist, Gandhian: all kinds of idealism have to be dropped. The moment you drop all kinds of idealism, suddenly you have dropped your schizophrenia. You are not two, you are one. You are simply whatever you are. Then you have the innocence of a tree, the innocence of an animal, the innocence of a bird, and something more: the consciousness of a human being.
And the meeting of the innocence of a bird and the consciousness of a human being creates the buddha. Buddhahood is nothing but innocence plus consciousness.
But the man who carries great ideals can never be simple and innocent, it is impossible. He is always cunning, trying to be somebody, trying to reach somewhere. All that he can do is pretend.
When I am saying this, I am saying it to you. My sannyasins have to drop all kinds of idealism. That’s the revolution I am initiating you into. You have to forget the future, you have to forget what should be. You only have to watch that which is, and that can be done right now, you need not postpone it. At any moment you can watch what you are. Don’t condemn – because if you condemn, you cannot watch. Don’t judge; if you judge you have already become prejudiced. Don’t be in a hurry to conclude. Life never comes to a conclusion; it cannot – because there is no death. It goes on and on, it is an eternal process, it never comes to a conclusion. Only stupid people come to conclusions.
The intelligent person goes on moving, flowing, growing. There is no end to it, even the sky is not the limit. The intelligent person goes on learning. He is a learner, and a learner forever. He never becomes knowledgeable.
This story is beautiful:
Bahaudin el-Shah, great teacher of the Naqshbandi dervishes, one day met a confrere in the great square of Bukhara.
What is the meaning of the: …great teacher…? The ordinary teacher only indoctrinates you, he gives you information. In the school, college, the university, that’s what the teachers go on doing: they simply give you information, they feed you knowledge. Their whole function is to transfer knowledge from the older generation to the newer generation. They function as mediators between the going generation and the coming generation. They are agents of the past.
That’s why your whole education system is always orthodox, conventional, conformist. It is never revolutionary. That’s why revolution has not happened up to now – because revolution can happen only through education, only through right education. And your education is wrong education; it is miseducation.
Why is it wrong? It is wrong because it perpetuates the past against the future. It is wrong because it perpetuates the dead against the living. It is wrong because it goes on molding small children into patterns that their fathers and forefathers have decided. It is wrong because these children will not be living in the same world in which their fathers and forefathers lived, so they will always be misfits. They are being prepared for something, for some world, which exists no longer.
Our whole system of education is stupid. It prepares you for a world which is no longer in existence, and it does not prepare you for a world which is coming, arising, which is dawning – so you will remain a misfit. You will never be able to live rightly. If you follow your education, you will feel yourself out of date. If you follow the new world that is happening, your education will not be of any help in it. You will be almost uneducated, and that hurts the ego.
The ego does not want to accept the fact that “I am uneducated.” The ego always wants to be somebody special. That’s why people go on bragging about their education, how many degrees they have. People enjoy degrees, certificates, diplomas very much; they are always exhibiting them.
Why? – because the ego wants to be somebody special, and your education makes you special. You are a doctor, you are an engineer, a scientist, this and that. If you have no education you are simply a human being; you don’t have any adjectives, you don’t have any specialities with you.
So people finally decide to cling to their education. Clinging to the education is, in an indirect way, clinging to the past, and to cling to the past is to live a ghostly existence. They will never belong to this earth, they will never belong to the present.
That you can see. The more educated a person is, the less relevant he is to the times he lives in. He is very competent about the past, he is very competent about all that has been, but he is incapable of living herenow, and he is utterly incapable of penetrating the future. He cannot be an inquirer, he cannot investigate. He becomes a believer. The teachers are agents, political agents, of the past, poisoning the future.
Then who is the great teacher? The great teacher is not in the service of the past. The great teacher is in the service of the future. The great teacher is in the service of the new, not of the old – that is the difference to be remembered.
This man, Bahaudin el-Shah, is a great teacher. He does not impart information, he imparts being. He does not teach in an ordinary way, he finds extraordinary ways of provoking awareness. Rather than giving you verbal information, he creates situations.
Because I am creating situations here, I am in constant difficulty with this society, this rotten society that exists all around. I am creating situations here, and they have become accustomed to teachers, they have become completely unaware of the great teachers. They want me just to read the Gita here, and comment on it. I am creating situations, psychological situations and devices in which you can become aware of the great truths of life. Of course, those truths are contained in the Gita, in the Bible, in the Koran too, but they are contained in a very ancient language which you cannot understand at all.
And they were also given in particular situations. For example, the Gita was given in a very particular situation: on the battlefield. Krishna was a great teacher. He had not chosen a secluded hermitage in the Himalayas to teach his disciple, Arjuna. He had chosen the battlefield. Armies were facing each other, everybody was ready to kill and murder or be killed and murdered. He had chosen such a tense situation, such an alive situation, such a dangerous situation, to impart something to his disciple. This is a great teacher.
The people who have been continuously commenting on the Gita for centuries are just teachers, not great teachers. They are just informing people about the meaning of this word or that. Words don’t count. In the final reckoning, only true situations count. A great teacher is one who uses all kinds of living situations to provoke awareness in you.
But then there are bound to be problems. The society feels angry. It is perfectly happy if you go on talking about the Koran, the Bible, the Vedas – because that doesn’t do anything in the world. The reality remains the same, the vested interests remain the same. Nothing is harmed; on the contrary, all this spiritual talk helps the vested interests. It is safer if people are religious – because the so-called religious people are people who are afraid. They can’t make a revolution, they can’t move into a rebellion. They can’t disobey – because all these religious teachers and commentators go on teaching them the beautiful world of absolute obedience, conformity, contentment. They always go on teaching you how to become imitators, they don’t teach you how to become authentic.
The authentic person will always be in conflict with the vested interests. If he wants to be authentic and true, he is bound to come in conflict with a false society. He is bound to come in conflict with whatever is false.
A great teacher is not only a mediator between the past and you. A great teacher is a herald of the future. He makes you aware of the possible, of the potential.
Bahaudin el-Shah, great teacher of the Naqshbandi dervishes, one day met a confrere in the great square of Bukhara.
The newcomer was a wandering Kalandar of the Malamati: “The Blameworthy.”
That is another order of the Sufis. The Sufis have many orders, many schools. Those schools have arisen through different masters. Whenever a master exists on the earth, he introduces many methods, he creates many devices, and around the master a school arises, a school where people go through alchemical changes.
Around a real master a scientific lab exists. It is not just a retreat for old people, as Indian ashramas have become. Old, retired, almost dead, one leg in the grave, just waiting to be thrown in any moment – for all these people Indian ashramas have become shelters.
This is not the purpose of an ashrama. An ashrama has to be a great lab, a great experiment into people’s lives. It has to be a scientific process. If people are ready to pass through those processes, they come out totally changed. A mutation has to happen; only then have they been near a master. And it can happen only near a master. The school arises only near a master.
The great Sufi master, Rumi, has said:
Footprints but come to the ocean’s shore.
Therein, no trace remains.
All your scriptures only come to the ocean’s shore. They can’t take you into the journey of the unknown, they remain part of the known.
Then who is going to take you into the ocean, into the uncharted? Only if you trust somebody, only if you love somebody so deeply that you are ready to risk your life. A master is a person who creates trust in you: “Yes, it is worth risking.” His presence is charismatic, magnetic. Once you have tasted the love of a master, you are ready to go wherever he is going, not knowing where he is going. He cannot convince you of where he is going because the unknowable cannot be communicated through words. And even if he tries to communicate, you will not understand it, you will understand something else.
Between a master and a disciple there is a problem: the master speaks from his vision, from his Everest, from his peak of consciousness, and the disciple hears from his darkness, his valley. The moment the words reach the disciple, they have changed their color, their meaning.
Just the other day I was reading…

In the UN they have developed computers that can translate one language into another. Ideally, if the translated passage were then translated by computer back into the first language, the original words ought to be regained. This, however, does not allow for the ambiguity of languages.
There is the story of a computer that was ordered to translate a common English phrase into Russian, and then translate the Russian translation back into English.
What went in was, “Out of sight, out of mind.” This phrase was to be translated into Russian and then back into English.
What came out was, “Invisible insanity.”

That’s what happens continuously between a master and a disciple. And remember, the difference is far greater than between Russian and English. Russian and English are not so different, the distance is not so great, but the distance between a master and a disciple, between the one who is awakened and the one who is fast asleep and snoring, is immense. They are worlds apart. So even if the master tries – and he tries hard, but the result is very disappointing – what reaches the disciple is something absolutely different, and not only different, but diametrically opposite. Then the master has to find other ways, not direct, but indirect.
Bahauddin used this situation. The Sufi dervish that had come to Bahauddin’s school was a wandering Kalandar. Kalandar is the name of the Sufis who belong to the Malamati Order. Their name is beautiful, just as the name of the school of Bahauddin is beautiful. Bahauddin’s disciples are known as Naqshbandis; it means “The Designers.” He was a great designer, and you will see it in this story. He used this design to provoke something. He was a great designer, a naqshband; hence the order is known as the Order of the Naqshbandis.
But the Order of Malamati is also one of the most beautiful orders. Malamati means: The Blameworthy. The basis of the Malamati Order is: never blame others, always blame yourself. That will bring transformation.
The general tendency of the human mind is to throw the blame on somebody. That is a way to protect yourself, but then you remain the same. Watch. We know at least five thousand years’ history that has been going on and on in different names, but the same thing goes on. In the beginning people used to believe, “What can we do? The real doer is God, so whatever he is doing, he is doing. It is beyond our capacity to change.” That is a trick to throw the whole responsibility on God’s shoulders, then you are freed. Then if you are a thief, what can you do? And if you are a murderer, you are a murderer – what can you do? It is God who decides. In India they say – for five thousand years they have been saying this – that not even a leaf moves without his order. The very idea has kept the East poor, starved, ugly, dirty. The very idea, “What can we do? God is the doer,” has created a subtle, spiritual laziness, a very deep sleep. The East has lived in deep sleep, in an utterly helpless way.
This has happened in other countries too, in different names. In the beginning it was always God, then by and by people started suspecting whether God existed or not. Slowly, slowly the existence of God became doubtful, but we needed a scapegoat to throw our responsibilities on – then the idea of fate, then the idea of one’s past lives, karmas: that one has done something in the past life and now everything is determined by it. One cannot do anything, one is caught in the trap of one’s past lives.
Now, you cannot go back and change your past lives, so everything is destined. Just see the point: God is no longer there, so you need something else – the theory of karma, or fate, kismet, luck. Slowly, slowly these things also became worthless; then new ideas came, but the game remains the same.
Darwin said that it is evolution, the forces of evolution: man is not free, he is just a part of the forces of evolution – and they are tremendous! Man is simply moving within those forces. Those forces are the determining factors; you cannot do anything else, you are just a by-product. Whatever you are, you are at the mercy of the forces of evolution.
Now, that is another name for God, another name for karma, another name for fate. Nothing has changed. Just a scientific explanation, but the psychological trick is the same.
Then there was Karl Marx, and he said it is not evolution, it is the economic structure of the society that determines everything. He said it is not consciousness that determines the society and its structure, the truth is just vice versa: it is the society and its economic structure that determines consciousness, so you cannot do anything directly unless the society changes.
It is the same: unless God’s mind changes, unless fate changes; now it is the economic structure. And it is so inevitable that you cannot go against it, everything is determined by it.
Then came Sigmund Freud, and he said it is the unconscious that determines everything, your instinctive nature. These are all explanations for the same trick, and the trick is one: blame something on someone so that you can feel good and you can continue as you are, so that there is no need to go through any change.
The order of the Sufis called The Blameworthy say, “I am responsible, all blame is mine.” Just for a moment let this thought sink into your heart: I am responsible. Then suddenly two things start happening in you. One, if I am responsible, change is possible. Second, if I am responsible, there is no point in blaming others and constantly quarreling.
And there is no point in waiting for the whole world to change. You will not be here. Even if the whole world changes someday – it is not going to change, but even if it does change, you will not be here. Something has to be done right now, immediately – because your life is very short. You cannot wait for eternity for communism to come, for a classless society to happen, for a utopia to be fulfilled, or for the second coming of Christ – or when things have gone very badly, Krishna to come and deliver you. All nonsense! The basic trick is the same: “I am not responsible. Something has to happen to me; I cannot do anything.”
The approach of The Blameworthy is my approach here too, the same approach. All of these psychological groups that you have to go through are basically rooted in the idea that you are responsible. Take your responsibility on your own shoulders. In the beginning it hurts. It hurts because when you see the stupidity of your behavior – that your misery is created by yourself – it hurts. It always feels good and nice that somebody else is responsible for your misery: what can you do? The moment you see that you have been slapping your own face, nobody else is slapping you, it looks very stupid to continue. Then it seems meaningless to go on crying and complaining, “Why am I being beaten?” – and you are slapping yourself. If you don’t want to be beaten, don’t slap yourself. If you enjoy it, don’t complain.
This is the latest development in humanistic psychologies, but this has been the foundation of the Order of the Blameworthy. Sufis were the first psychologists in the world. Their approach is very psychological.
In the beginning, certainly, it feels very bad because suddenly the whole burden that you had been throwing on others falls on your own head. You feel crushed, but only in the beginning. If you can survive the beginning…
That’s the whole purpose of living in a commune where you know that others have survived, that you will not be killed by this burden. Where you know that others have gone through it and have become silent and blissful, where you know others have gone through it and not only survived, but have become purified. That the fire is not your enemy, that the suffering gives you maturity, where you can see all kinds of people in all kinds of stages. That is the meaning of a school, a spiritual school: a place where you see the beginners; where you see the people who have gone a little farther ahead than the beginners; and the people who have reached almost to the middle of their journey; and the people who have gone beyond the middle; and then the people who are just reaching to the goal – and at least one master who has reached. It is a place where you can see the whole spectrum of spiritual stages, where you can see the whole journey. It gives courage. You know that you are not moving in a cul-de-sac; that you are not moving in darkness; that you are not moving in some kind of illusion, hallucination; that your efforts are going to bring results. You can see the results all around.
When a seed can see that the other seeds have sprouted; when the seed can see that a few other seeds have not only sprouted but become great bushes; when the seed can see that a few bushes have started giving fruit and flowers and are in bloom; a great desire, a longing, arises in the heart of the seed to jump into the soil and die. Then the seed is not afraid of dying because it knows that through dying is resurrection. It can see the resurrection: the whole garden is the proof.
The schools of the Sufis have always been called “the garden of the master.” They have been called the garden of the master for this particular purpose; they are places where you can see all the possible stages. That very experience of meeting people at different stages keeps you going on. Otherwise the journey is really in the dark, unknown. If there is only the master and the disciples and there are no people in between, it will be very difficult for you to connect with the master. A chain is needed.
You cannot see Everest, it is too far away beyond the clouds. But you can see a few people who are ahead of you; and then a few people who are still more ahead of you; and then you can see a few people who are just near the clouds and they are shouting to you, “Don’t be worried. We can see beyond the clouds, there is a peak.” That helps. That is the meaning of a school.
Malamati is one of the most significant Sufi schools, and its basis is now a recognized fact – that you are responsible for whatever you are. If you are miserable, you are responsible. In the beginning it hurts; the old joy of blaming others is gone. It is a joy when you can blame others.
Freudian psychoanalysis goes on blaming the mother, the father. It is a great joy – so you are not responsible. Your mother is responsible, your father is responsible. It is the old game.
First God was responsible, he is the Great Father. And what else? Now you cannot believe in the Great Father, but you can see that your father is there, your mother is there. Psychoanalysis throws the responsibility: your mother is responsible.
All these schools keep you tethered to your ignorance. All these doctrines are hindrances for growth. Growth is possible only when you have taken the whole responsibility upon yourself. In the beginning it hurts, but soon you start feeling a new thrill, a new adventure – because soon you become aware that if you are responsible, there is a way to go beyond. If others are responsible, there is no way to go beyond. Then you are doomed. If you are responsible, certainly something can be done. If you are creating your misery, you can uncreate it. If others are creating it, what can you do?
And remember, it is not only ordinary, worldly people who have been thinking in this way. Even so-called spiritual people think in this way. People come to me and they say, “What can we do? We live in the family, in the marketplace. We have wives and children and parents, and we have to look after them. How can we meditate? How can we be pure and honest and authentic? First we will have to leave the whole world. We will have to renounce the world. We will have to go to the Himalayan caves. Then…” But that day never comes. That is a way of postponing.
The trick is the same: the wife is responsible. It is not your sexual lust, it is the wife. There are scriptures which go on condemning women. They must have been written by neurotics. How can a man of understanding condemn women? They have not done anything to you. But there are scriptures and so-called saints who have been declaring down the ages that the woman is the door to hell. These people must have been in a very perverted state.
It is your lust. Rather than understanding the ways of lust, the ways of greed, the ways of possessiveness, the ways of jealousy, you throw the responsibility on the poor woman. And where is the poor woman going to throw the responsibility? Women have not been allowed to write scriptures, otherwise they would have thrown it on the man. Man has been very cunning. He has not allowed them to read scriptures, to write scriptures; no, not at all. They have been kept completely ignorant. Otherwise they would write, “The man is responsible, the man is the door to hell.” That would hurt your so-called saints very much.
Nobody is responsible for whatever you are. Only you are responsible. That is the beginning of real spirituality.
That’s why I don’t say to my sannyasins to leave the world, renounce the world, no. Renouncing is based on a false logic that the world is responsible. You can renounce the world and you can go to the Himalayas, but you will be the same person there. How can you leave your mind? You have only left the outer situation, and the inner is with you; it will again create the outer situation. It is not going to help.

A man came to me once and he said, “I want to commit suicide.”
So I said, “Okay, go and do it. Why have you come to me? Why waste time?”
He was shocked – because he had really come so that I could console him, convince him that there was no need to commit suicide, that it was not right, that it was a sin.
When I said, “Go and commit it. Why have you come? Why are you wasting your time?” he was shocked, taken aback. For a moment he could not say a single word. I said, “What are you waiting for? Go and commit it! I want to tell you just one thing: you are in for a surprise.”
He asked, “What do you mean?”
I said, “You will know. Commit suicide; you will still remain. That’s what I am saying. You are in for a surprise. You will still remain after suicide. Then come and tell me. You will be the same, and soon you will be in another womb, and you will start the same nonsense again. This is not the right way to commit suicide. If you really want to commit suicide, become a sannyasin.”
He said, “What do you mean?”
“Then we can really kill you – and then there is no possibility to survive! You will not enter another womb again. The real thing has to be done in your interiority. Dropping the outer body won’t help, but changing the inner mind will certainly bring great transformation.”

So first it may look a little sad – that “I am responsible,” and you may cry for a few days and weep. That’s good: it cleanses the eyes. Then suddenly, by and by, you will start becoming aware that you are free. Just the idea that “I am responsible” brings freedom. No, you are no longer in the hands of others. You are free to be miserable if you choose to be so; you are free not to be miserable if you choose to be so. You are free.
That is the meaning of sannyas, that is what sannyas is all about: freedom. But freedom has nothing to do with outer changes, freedom has something to do with inner understanding. And the basis of freedom is, “I am responsible.” Responsibility brings freedom. Throwing responsibility on others keeps you a slave.
Bahauddin was surrounded by disciples.
“From where do you come?” he asked the traveler, in the usual Sufi phrase.
“I have no idea,” said the other, grinning foolishly.
This story has two meanings. The first is given by Bahauddin himself, the second is only indicated – and I will give you the second meaning too. Bahauddin has given only the first meaning because the people he must have been surrounded by were not yet capable of understanding the second meaning. But he has indicated it, he has left the seed of it. Unless you are worthy, nothing can be told to you.
Now there are a few sannyasins here who are worthy of receiving the second meaning too, so first we will see what meaning Bahauddin gives.
He asked: “From where do you come?” It is just a formal question. “I have no idea,” said the other, grinning foolishly. Bahauddin says that he is pretending, he is playing the role, acting the role of humanity. And this is the situation. “From where have you come?” You don’t have any idea. You are here, but from where? Why? To where?
I have heard…

A man who had a few drinks too many fell from a fifth-floor window.
Soon a crowd of people had gathered around him. Then a policeman came along, pushed his way through the crowd and asked, “What is going on here?”
“I don’t know,” said the drunk. “I have only just got here myself.”

This is the situation that you are in. Fallen from some unknown, from the blue, not knowing at all from where you are coming. And if you don’t know from where you are coming, how can you know where you are going? Still you think there is great purpose in life, still you think that your life is meaningful. You are deceiving yourself.
And you have all that is needed for you to know, but you are not using it. You have the guitar, but you are not playing it, so the music is not heard. You have the potential of being aware, which can reveal all the secrets of from where you are coming, and where you are going and who you are, but you have not been digging into it – and that is the first thing any intelligent person would do.
I have heard the story of a courting couple…

One night they were sitting on a bench in the moonlight, and the odor of flowers permeated the atmosphere. It was a time and a circumstance which would inevitably engender romance in the heart of anybody. And John said to Mary, “Mary, if you was not what you is, what would you like to be?”
And Mary said, “John, if I was not what I is, I would like to be an American Beauty rose.”
Then Mary turned the question on John and said, “John, if you was not what you is, what would you like to be?”
John said, “If I was not what I is, I would like to be an octopus.”
Mary said, “John, what is an octopus?”
John said, “An octopus is some kind of fish or an animal or something that has a thousand arms.”
Mary said, “John, if you was an octopus and had a thousand arms, what would you do with all those arms?”
John said, “I would put every one of them around you.”
Mary said, “Go away, John. You ain’t using the two you already got.”

But this is the situation of humanity: you are not using that which you already have – and you have all that is needed. God never sends you into the world unprepared. Everything that is needed on life’s pilgrimage is provided, already provided.
“Where are you going? From where are you coming?”
The man said: “I have no idea…”
Some of Bahauddin’s disciples murmured their disapproval of this disrespect.
There are people who only see the outer, they cannot see the inner. They could not see that the man was acting a role. He was not a fool, but he was behaving foolishly. But great intelligence is needed to see things as they are. Fools can deceive you if they pretend to be knowledgeable, and intelligent people can befool you if they pretend to be idiots.
You can’t see, you have lost all vision and perspective. And the reason you can’t see is because you have not even seen yourself.
“Where are you going?” persisted Bahauddin.
“I do not know, “ shouted the dervish.
“What is good?”
By now a large crowd had gathered.
“I do not know.”
“What is evil?“
“I have no idea.”
“What is right?”
“Whatever is good for me.”
“What is wrong?”
“Whatever is bad for me.”
Just listen to those answers, and you can see that the man had a great vision. Whatever he was saying is true about ninety-nine point nine percent of people, and it was true about the crowd that was standing there, but nobody could detect it. It was so simple, nobody could think that he was simply answering the way humanity is behaving.
If somebody asks you, “From where are you coming?” what answer are you going to give?

A Zen master asked a newcomer, “From where are you coming?”
The newcomer said, “The trees are green, and flowers have bloomed, and it is tremendously beautiful here.”

Now, this is the answer of one who knows. The man is saying, “I am not coming from anywhere, I have always been here.”

Raman Maharshi was dying, and the disciples started crying and weeping, naturally.
Raman opened his eyes and he asked, “Why are you crying?”
One disciple asked, “Bhagwan, where will you be going?”
Raman said, “What nonsense are you talking about? I am going to be here. I have not come from anywhere and I am not going anywhere. I have always been here and I will always be here.”

Because the innermost core is eternal, it never comes, never goes. It has no birth, no death. If you know, then your answer will be this. If you don’t know, you will say, “I am coming from Mumbai,” or from London or from New York. And where are you going? Then you will say, “To Kathmandu, to Kabul, or to Goa.”
That man could have answered the same way, but he really played a beautiful drama: he behaved like humanity. If somebody asks, “What is right?” what are you going to answer? What is right? You may quote scriptures, but that won’t do.
If you really look inside yourself, the man has answered for you; he said: “Whatever is good for me.” “Whatever is good for me is right” – that’s how people are behaving.
I have heard…

Herman Katz lay dying. He called his wife Rebecca to his side and said, “Rebecca, I am dying, I am not going to be around much longer, so please do me a favor. Put on your green silk dress, and your alligator shoes and red nail polish, and fix up your hair, and put on your mink coat, and all your jewelry.”
“Herman, have you gone crazy?” asked Rebecca. “This is the middle of August in New York City, you are a dying man, and you want I should put on my green silk dress, my mink coat, my alligator shoes, all my jewelry, and red nail polish? What is the matter with you?”
Herman Katz groaned in pain and asked, “Rebecca, please, is this the moment to argue with a dying man? Please, do me this favor. Put on your green silk dress, your alligator shoes, your mink coat, all your jewelry, and red fingernail polish, and come sit by the side of the bed.”
So Rebecca, to humor him, puts on her green silk dress, her alligator shoes, her mink coat, all her jewelry, fixes up her hair, puts on red fingernail polish, and sits down by the side of Herman’s bed.
Herman Katz looks at her admiringly. His eyes shine with love and he says, “Rebecca, you are a beautiful woman. You are still, even after all these years, a stunningly attractive woman. Rebecca, when the good Lord God comes to finally take me away, who knows, maybe he will change his mind and decide to take you instead.”

That’s what everybody is doing in the world. whatever is good for me is right, even if the other has to die. This is the whole politics of the world. Everybody is political in this world because everybody is living with this idea: whatever is good for me is right. Then by right means or wrong means, it doesn’t matter. Everybody is selfish.
Even your so-called spiritual people are selfish, very selfish – maybe more than you. If they renounce the world, they are renouncing only to gain the joys of heaven. It is just a projection of greed, ambition, lust, and nothing else.
And Bahauddin asked:
“What is wrong?”
“Whatever is bad for me.”
The crowd, irritated beyond its patience by this dervish, drove him away. He went off, striding purposefully in a direction which led nowhere, as far as anyone knew.
“Fools” said Bahauddin Naqshband. “This man is acting the part of humanity. While you were despising him, he was deliberately demonstrating heedlessness as each of you does, all unaware, every day of your lives.”
Bahauddin has used the situation in a tremendously beautiful way. The crowd must have been shocked; for a moment the thinking of those people must have stopped.
Truth always shocks because we have lived so much in lies that whenever a fragment of truth, even a fragment, reaches our hearts, it is an electric shock. We are stoned, we cannot even breathe for a moment.
Now, to say it verbally would not have served the purpose. The situation revealed it. This is a design. There is every possibility that the dervish was invited by Bahauddin. There is every possibility that he was a guest, and Bahauddin had asked him to come behave in such a way so he could show people how unaware they were.

Sherlock Holmes, that master detective, was sitting in his favorite chair smoking his pipe and reading a book when he heard a knock at the door. It was his loyal friend and assistant, Doctor Watson.
“Ah, good morning, Watson. Don’t you find it a bit warm to be wearing your red flannel underwear?”
Doctor Watson was astonished by this brilliant stroke of deductive logic. “Holmes,” Doctor Watson said, “how on earth did you guess that I was wearing my red flannel underwear?”
“Elementary, my dear Doctor Watson. You forgot to put your pants on.”

People are moving without pants – without awareness of what they are doing, of what they are not doing, of where they are going. And when you tell them the truth, they think you have revealed something great: “a great experiment in deductive logic.”
Buddhas have been telling you simple truths. No logic is involved at all. Just looking at you is enough – you are not wearing pants! But you go on believing that you are wearing pants.
Man is unawareness, and he need not be. Man can become a light of awareness. And only when you are a light of awareness is your life worth living, is your life, life. Otherwise you are simply dragging, somehow managing, pulling. It is ugly, it is desertlike. It has not known anything worth knowing. It has not seen beauty, it has not experienced good, it has not been able to touch anything that is sacred. It has not come across truth; it cannot – if you remain unaware.
The only thing needed is to wake up. And remember, you can even dream that you are awake, and many are doing that too. Have you not dreamed sometimes that you think you are awake, and you are going to the office? And then your wife comes and pulls you out of your bed and says, “What are you doing? It is getting late, you have to go to the office, and it is not Sunday.” Then you jump out of bed, then you become aware that you were dreaming. That dream was a trick of the mind.
Have you not dreamed sometimes, when your bladder is full in the night and you start dreaming, that you are going to the bathroom and you are in the bathroom? That is just a trick so that the sleep remains undisturbed.
Dreaming is a support to your sleep. Ordinarily people think that dreaming is a disturbance in sleep; that is not right. All the psychological investigation that has gone into dreaming has proved something just the opposite. Now the psychologists who have been working on dreaming and sleep say that dreaming is a friend of sleep, not a disturbance. It keeps you asleep, otherwise there are a thousand and one chances of your waking up in the night. But a dream gives you an explanation, a beautiful explanation.
For example, you have fixed the alarm, and the alarm goes off. You want to get up at three o’clock. You want to get up to catch a train, and it is cold, and you are sleepy, and the alarm goes off. You start having a dream that you are passing by the side of a hill, and on the hill there is a beautiful temple, and the temple bells are ringing. Now a trick, a rationalization. The mind says, “It is not the alarm clock, it is just temple bells ringing.” And you turn over and pull up your blanket and tuck yourself in well, and go to sleep.
Your dreams are in the service of your sleep, they serve your sleep. They always manage to give you some explanation.
There are many people who think they are alert. They are not. There are many people who think they are virtuous. They are not. There are many people who go on thinking a thousand and one things, but they are not those things, those things are just dreams. And remember this faculty of the mind: it can rationalize anything.

A man walking along a country lane encountered an old lady who was holding two kettles up to her ears. He could not help asking her what she was doing.
“Well, if you hold two kettles to your ears,” the old woman said, “you can hear a noise like a football match.”
The man took the two kettles, held them up to his ears for a while, then said, “I can’t hear anything.”
“Ha ha ha,” cackled the old lady. “It must be halftime.”

You can always find an explanation. Explanations help you to remain the way you are. If you really want to move in a new world, in a new consciousness, stop finding explanations for your dreams. Even if the fact hurts, let it hurt, but don’t hide it behind a fiction.
You go on doing things you don’t want to do. You go on not doing things you always wanted to do. You live in a very divided way. See to it that this division disappears. This division is the cause of all your misery and hell. A divided person is a miserable person, and a divided person is in constant turmoil; he is in a civil war, fighting with himself. All your politicians and priests want you to continue fighting with yourself so that they can go on exploiting you, so you don’t have enough energy to fight with them.
If you are fighting with yourself, you can’t have energy enough to be rebellious. This is the basic strategy which has been perpetuated down the ages by all kinds of exploiters. Divide man and rule. And they have divided you in two: the outer and the inner, the lower and the higher, the good and the bad, the actual and the ideal, the earthly and the heavenly, the worldly and the otherworldly. They have divided everything. You are living in thousands of fragments.
Drop all these divisions. See it: these divisions are your enemies. Renounce these divisions, become utterly one.
What is the way to become one? Just accept your actuality. There is no other reality. You are the reality. Accept your reality, and in that very acceptance, grace descends. In that very acceptance, intelligence arises because you accumulate so much energy. Not fighting, energy goes on and on, you become a reservoir of energy. Energy is delight, and great energy is great delight.
You can become infinite energy. You are, but you are caught in traps. Those traps have beautiful names, of religion, morality, ethics, virtue: beautiful names.
Your prison is called the temple, the mosque, the gurdwara, the church. Your jailers have become your priests. Your scriptures have become your knowledge and are preventing your wisdom from arising. All that you have been doing has not helped you to become aware, so now do something that can make you aware.
What can make you aware? Seeing the point that society is not interested in your blissfulness or in your awareness, you drop out of society. By dropping out I don’t mean that you escape to the Himalayas. You remain in it, but deep down you are no longer in it. That is sannyas. That’s what it means to become a Sufi.

A man wanted to commit suicide. To make sure he did the job, he got a bottle of poison, a rope, a gun, some gasoline, and matches.
Pouring the gasoline all over his clothing, he climbed a tree and crawled out on a branch overhanging a lake. He hung himself from the limb, drank the poison, set his clothing on fire, and then shot himself.
Alas! He missed his head, the bullet hit the rope, he fell into the water and the water put the flames out. He swallowed so much water that the poison became harmless. Then he had to swim as hard as he could in order to save his life!

This is your situation. Beware. Watch what you are doing. Watch each act. De-automatize each act. Remain constantly alert. Walking, watch each step. Eating, watch. Even while going to sleep, go watchfully into it, into what is happening. Slowly, slowly the body relaxes, the limbs relax. Watch: feel the coolness of the bedsheet, the softness of the pillow. Be sensitive, be watchful.
Then slowly, slowly the mind is moving into another dimension, the dimension of sleep. You are just in between, a little awake, a little asleep. Watch, go on watching, go on watching as long as you can.
And one day it happens: you fall asleep, and yet watching continues. Then you learn how to watch the dreams. Then, on another level, one day you can even watch your deep sleep, dreamless sleep. And then finally, when you have been able to watch your waking life, your dream life, your sleep life, you have arrived at the fourth state. Just the other day I was talking about turiya, the fourth state. You have come home, you are alert.
This is one explanation, that Bahauddin gave to his disciples – but hidden in it is another. Those disciples must not have been worthy enough, so he only indicated it.
He says: “Fools! This man is acting the part of humanity. While you were despising him, he was deliberately demonstrating heedlessness as each of you does, all unaware, every day of your lives.” But who can act? Only one who has gone out of the act. Who can behave in such a way and depict humanity in its actuality, without any pretensions? Only one who has reached the fourth stage, only one who is now a witness, aware, alert.
It is reported that Jesus was thought to be a fool. It is also reported that Francis was thought to be a fool; so was the case with Bodhidharma, the founder of Zen in China; so has the case been with thousands of Zen, Sufi, and Hasid mystics. They have been thought to be fools, and they were the most alert people. But they behaved like fools just to make you aware. If you could not see it in your own life, they functioned as mirrors so that you could see your ugly face.
But people are such that if they see a mirror reflecting their ugly face, they will destroy the mirror. They will say, “This mirror is not right. I am such a beautiful person, and this must be a distorting mirror.”
That’s why people killed Jesus; he was a mirror, and showed them in their total ugliness and nakedness. And they poisoned Socrates; he was a mirror, one of the best mirrors ever.
Why do people become so angry with these people? Why are they so angry with me? Their anger is that what they are doing unconsciously is being done consciously here, deliberately. They can’t understand it. They can’t see the point. They become angry against the mirror.
This place is a mirror: it will show you in all your dirt, it will show you in all your perversions. It will take courage to be here. And if you are really courageous, a great blessing is going to be yours. You can go beyond those perversions – because the only way to go beyond is by becoming aware, alert, watchful, a witness.
This man must have been a great mystic in his own right. He must have been invited by Bahauddin. He belonged to another school. That’s why he must have been invited, so nobody would recognize, so nobody would think that he was a Sufi at all, so his behavior would be thought the behavior of a madman. It is very easy to understand the behavior of someone who belongs to your own school; it is difficult to understand the behavior of one who does not belong to your own school.
For example, Christians will not be able to understand Mahavira standing naked, and Jainas will not be able to understand Jesus being crucified either. Do you know what Jainas say?
Once a Jaina monk came to see me and he said, “You talk about Mahavira, but in the same breath you talk about Jesus. That doesn’t look right. Jesus cannot be compared to Mahavira. Mahavira is an enlightened one. Jesus is not an enlightened one – maybe a good man, but not enlightened.” I asked, “Why do you say that he is not enlightened?” He said, “How can he be enlightened? The theory of karma proves it. He was crucified, and one can be crucified only if he has committed great sins in his past.”
Now, that is a Jaina explanation. They say that when Mahavira used to move – he was naked, barefoot – on the mud roads of Bihar, if there were thorns on the road, either those thorns would jump outside the road because Mahavira was coming, or they would turn upside down so his feet were not hurt – because he was the purest one. All his karmas were burned, now no suffering was possible for him.
If this is the explanation, then certainly Jesus was a sinner, not a savior at all. If Jesus came into the community of the Jainas, he would be thought of as a sinner. They might have compassion on him, but they could not respect him.
And the same would happen to Mahavira because the Christians would ask, “What service have you done to humanity? The savior is one who serves.” Now, Mahavira never opened a hospital, never ran a school, never went in search of lepers to kiss them. He would look utterly selfish just standing under beautiful green trees, meditating. “The world is suffering and you are meditating? What more selfishness is possible?” The world is on fire and Mahavira is enjoying ecstasies. What kind of man is this? He may be a good man, but not a savior – and utterly selfish.
It is very difficult to understand somebody who belongs to a different gestalt of thinking, a different style of life. Only a man who has arrived can see that Jesus, Mahavira, Krishna, Buddha, and many others, are all the same. Only one reality has been expressed through them – in different languages, of course, in different styles of course. They have all painted the same reality; their paintings are different.
For example, if you bring ten painters and the sun is setting and you tell them to paint, do you think their paintings will all be the same? Although they are painting the same reality, the paintings are going to be different. And the greater the painters, the greater will be the difference. If they are just photographers, not real painters, maybe the paintings will look alike. If they are real painters, geniuses – if van Gogh is painting, and Picasso and Goya and Gauguin – those paintings will be utterly different. You will not be able to figure out that it is the same sunset. Their individuality, their signature, will be there.
When Mahavira reflects, he is reflecting the same existence, the same truth as Jesus, as Mohammed, as Bahauddin – but it is always difficult to recognize somebody who comes from a different gestalt. That’s why those people missed, otherwise he would have been seen as an awakened soul, an awakened consciousness. He must have been an enlightened person. His answers are almost like Bodhidharma’s: that is the second meaning, the deeper meaning of the story.

Emperor Wu in China asked Bodhidharma, “Who are you?” and Bodhidharma said, “I don’t know, sir.” And Bodhidharma was the one who knew. If he did not know, then nobody knew. And he said, “I don’t know.”
Even Emperor Wu missed. Thinking that Bodhidharma himself had said he did not know, what was the point? He felt frustrated because he had been waiting for Bodhidharma to come from India; it had taken years for Bodhidharma to reach China.
Seeing Wu, Bodhidharma felt, “He has not understood my answer.” He turned back. He crossed the border of Wu’s kingdom, went into the mountains.
Later on Wu repented very much because another Zen master told him, “You are a fool. You could not understand. His statement was the absolute statement, ‘I don’t know,’ for many reasons. First, he was no longer an individual; his ego had disappeared” – what Sufis call fana fi’llah, the drop has dropped into the ocean – “so who is there to know? That’s why he said, ‘I don’t know.’
“And secondly, in that ultimate knowing, there is nobody who knows and nobody who is known. The division between the subject and the object disappears; there is nobody who knows and nobody who is known. The knower becomes the known. Yes, there is a kind of awareness, but it is neither subjective nor objective. It is transjective, it is transcendental to both. That’s why he said, ‘I don’t know.’ How could he claim knowledge? Knowledge is claimed only by stupid people. He had claimed ignorance and innocence. You missed the whole point.”
But then it was too late. They searched for Bodhidharma. By the time they found him in the mountains, Wu had died. On the grave of Wu was written: “I am sorry. If you ever come here, please forgive me, Master Bodhidharma. I am utterly sorry and repentful that I could not understand your answer. It was too big for my understanding, it was beyond me.”

That is another explanation.
Remember both, one from your side, one from my side. Meditate over this beautiful parable.
Enough for today.

============================================================

The first question:
Osho,
I am in deep confusion about trust and action. Part of me says, “If you sit back, nothing will happen. God helps those who help themselves,” while another part of me says, “Don't do anything. Don't push the river. Just trust and everything will be all right.”
I am neither trusting enough nor active enough. I am caught between the two, or move from one position to the other. Can you say something about this please?
Trust does not mean that everything will be all right. Trust means everything is already all right. Trust knows no future; trust knows only the present. The moment you think of the future, it is already distrust.
The moment you start thinking, “Everything will be all right if I can trust,” your mind is active, you are not trusting. You are simply trying to manipulate existence now through passivity, but the manipulation is there. Inactivity is not trust. If this motive, “Everything has to be all right for me” is there, you are watching from the corner of your eye. You have not yet understood what trust is.
You are hanging between activity and inactivity, and activity and inactivity are just two aspects of the same coin. They are not opposites, they are complementaries. And you will go on hanging between them, wavering between those two because when you do something, sooner or later you will get tired.
Each action brings tiredness, and then you start hoping that something will happen through inaction. If you are in inaction, through inaction you will get bored sooner or later. Every inactivity bores, and then you move to action. This is the duality of action and inaction. You have not yet known what trust is.
Trust is neither action nor inaction. Trust can act, trust can be inactive. Trust simply means everything is already right, there is no need to hanker for something else. A need not be B. Whatever you are, you are, and it is good. Relaxing into it does not mean becoming inactive – you may be an active person, so if you relax in it, great activity will be released. Or you may be an inactive person: if you relax into it, great inactivity may be released. But that has nothing to do with you. You are not deciding whether to be active or inactive, you are simply relaxing into whosoever you are. Then whatever happens, happens, whatever is happening, is happening, and everything is good because “God is.”
I am not saying, let me repeat again, that you will necessarily become inactive, no. Lao Tzu will become inactive, Krishna will not become inactive, but both are men of trust. Then where do they meet? their personalities are totally different, not only different but diametrically opposite. Krishna lives a life of intense activity and Lao Tzu lives a life of tremendous passivity, but both are men of trust.
Lao Tzu has trusted and relaxed, and this is what he finds happening to him: he falls deeper and deeper into passivity. He becomes just a presence, a silent presence. If something at all happens through him, it is action through inaction. Remember these words: action through inaction. If something at all happens through him, he is just a catalytic agent. It happens through his presence, not through his activity.
Just the opposite is the case with Krishna, he is all activity. He is also a man of trust. He has relaxed into himself and in that very relaxation, he has exploded into a thousand and one actions. If sometimes you find him inactive, that simply means action is getting ready, action is pregnant in his inaction.
If Lao Tzu is action through inaction, then Krishna is inaction through action. But both are men of trust. As far as trust is concerned there is no difference at all, both have relaxed.
When a rose relaxes it becomes a rose, and when a lotus relaxes it becomes a lotus. A lotus is a lotus, a rose is a rose – they are different, but as far as their relaxation is concerned, their acceptance is concerned, it is the same acceptance, the same being, the same trust.
Don’t start thinking that trust is synonymous with inactivity; it is not. So simply relax into your own self.
A third possibility is also there because Jesus is both. Sometimes he is active and sometimes very inactive. He is just standing between Lao Tzu and Krishna. If Krishna is all action and Lao Tzu all inaction, Jesus is just exactly in the middle – a great synthesis. Sometimes he is very active, and then he goes to the mountains for forty days to fast, to sit silently with the trees, to meditate, to be with God. Then he comes back again to the world. He is a revolutionary, a rebel. But again and again he says to his disciples, “Now it is enough and I would like to go into seclusion.” Again and again he goes to meditate in the mountains, he disappears for days, and then again he is there in the world like a flame, a torch burning from both ends together.
All three possibilities are there. Simply relax and let things happen. But don’t misunderstand trust as inactivity.
That has happened in this country; trust became inactivity. This country has thought for centuries that if you trust in God, there is no need to do anything. And it looks logical too. If you trust that he is the doer, why should you bother? You just sit silently, wait: whenever it is going to happen, it is going to happen, and if it is not going to happen, it is not going to happen. Why interfere? The whole country became lethargic, passive. It lost all luster.
The West has taken another extreme: because God’s existence became suspicious through scientific evolution, God is no longer as certain as he used to be – his existence is uncertain – so to trust in him may be simply stupid. Man has to act on his own. So the West has taken just the opposite route, to be active, constantly active – so much so that even in the night people cannot fall asleep. The activity has become chronic; even in their sleep they toss and turn and they talk, and they dream. Their sleep is a disturbed sleep, and many have completely forgotten how to sleep. Insomnia is becoming an almost universal phenomenon in the West – too much activity. Because “God is not,” you cannot trust.
In the East, too much inactivity… Because “God is,” you need not act. But both standpoints are utterly foolish.
Trust simply means that you relax into your nature. Whether God is or is not has nothing to do with trust. That too has to be understood.
Whenever you use the word trust you always ask, “In whom?” as if trust needs an object. No, trust does not need an object. Trust is a state of your being, it is not object-oriented. A man who does not believe in God can trust, and a man who believes in God may not trust. God is not so important, not necessarily needed. For example, Buddha trusts; he does not believe in God. Mahavira trusts; he does not believe in God. Lao Tzu trusts; he neither believes in God nor disbelieves in God. He never talks about God, God is almost irrelevant.
Then trust is something which happens in you, it has no outer reference. Trust is your relaxed state of being. Trust means be yourself; don’t do anything which goes against your nature. You can call nature “God” or you can call God “nature.” It is just a question of preference. If you are a theist, call nature “God”; if you are an atheist, perfectly good, call God “nature” – but trust remains the very foundation of a real life.
And then whatever happens – action, inaction, both – allow it. Go into it deeply, totally, wholly.

The second question:
Osho,
I am experiencing something that I am calling “the pain of myself.” Can you say what this is?
The ordinary life of humanity is a continuous effort to avoid oneself. Everybody is doing it, in different ways of course. Nobody can sit silently and be alone. Watch yourself, how fidgety you become if there is nothing to do. If the radio is not there, and television is not there, and the newspaper is not there, and you don’t have a book to read and nobody to talk to, just think how fidgety, restless you become. You are almost in a panic, as if you are dying. You need something to remain occupied with, you cannot be with yourself.
Whenever you are with yourself you start feeling bored. Now, this is strange. And if somebody else feels bored with you, you feel very hurt, but you yourself feel bored with yourself! And everybody is the same; nobody feels good being alone.
Man is constantly escaping from himself, that is his whole activity. In business, chasing money, or in politics, chasing power, there is a constant need to be amused, to be entertained. Go to a football match or go to a cricket match or go to the races, but go somewhere. Join a club, a crowd, go to a movie, be a spectator somewhere or other, but don’t ever sit silently.
Why? What is the fear? Because the moment you sit silently, the first thing that you experience is a tremendous loneliness, and fear arises out of it, and pain and anguish. When you sit silently for a few moments, you suddenly see that your whole life is just illusory. You are only believing that you have friends – because nobody is going to be with you when you die. You are only believing that you have a wife, a husband, children, father, mother, brothers. These are all just make-believes so that you are never allowed to know your loneliness.
Whenever you are alone, that loneliness erupts, surfaces. Suddenly you start feeling yourself a stranger in a vast world, an abysmal world, infinite. And you are there, just a tiny speck of dust – although conscious – but so tiny, so helpless, so powerless, and all alone. That creates pain, panic, anguish. You rush back into some activity, you start doing something or other that keeps you away from this truth.
There are only two types of people: one, who escape from their loneliness – the majority, ninety-nine point nine percent, who escape from themselves; the remaining point one percent are the meditators, who say, “If loneliness is a truth, it is a truth. Then there is no point in running away from it. It is better to go into it, encounter it, see what it is face-to-face.”
Meditation means going into your loneliness wholeheartedly, to discover it, to investigate it, to inquire into it. That’s what meditation is all about.
And the person who is a meditator is religious, all others are just worldly. They may go to the churches, to the temples, to the synagogues; that doesn’t matter, that doesn’t mean a thing. That is again an occupation. Going to the temple, to the church, to the synagogue is an occupation. It is exactly the same as going to the Lion’s Club or the Rotary Club or to the movie or to the cricket match – it is the same, a religious kind of entertainment. You can go there and you get involved in something, a ritual, a prayer, music, this and that.
Meditation means you are not escaping anymore. Even though it hurts, you are not escaping. It is painful, but you are not escaping. If it is there, you have to face it, to inquire as deeply as possible into it because it is your reality. And by knowing it deeply you will become a man of wisdom.
What you are feeling is the first step of meditation. You are encountering your loneliness. If you go on encountering it, if you are courageous enough, and you go on encountering it and you don’t start escaping, then one day loneliness changes its color: it becomes aloneness. And that is the moment of great mutation, when loneliness becomes aloneness. They don’t mean the same thing, they are worlds apart. Loneliness is when you hanker for something, some occupation. When you hanker for the other and you miss the other, that is loneliness.
And when you have started enjoying the beauty, the austere beauty of being alone, the silence, the stillness, the joy of just being, breathing in the sun, just sitting under a tree doing nothing, listening to the birds, just being utterly herenow, and a great joy arises…
But before that joy, there is going to be much pain. It happens only when you have passed through your pain. The pain is just like when somebody wants to leave alcohol; he will feel much pain because he has become addicted to alcohol. He will go through withdrawal symptoms. The body will ask, the mind will ask – because they always become settled with routines… The mind will say, “I need alcohol,” the body will say, “I need alcohol.” There is a great thirst, a great urge: “What are you doing?” And you will feel great pain.
If you can persist and remain patient and watching, withdrawal symptoms will disappear sooner or later. It depends on you. If you are really determined to go into it, those withdrawal symptoms will disappear.
You are feeling withdrawal symptoms. You have become addicted to the other. Now for the first time you are taking the courageous step of being lonely: the pain will be there. It is a birth pain, a pain of growth. It will disappear, there is nothing to be worried about. It is good because it is not going to harm you. Escapes harm, encounters never do. Facing a truth is always maturing; it helps you to become integrated. Escaping from the truth is living a lie. You can deceive, but you are simply deceiving yourself and nobody else, and you will be the loser in the end.
If you start allowing this pain… Let it be. Note that there is pain, but don’t do anything about it. Let it be. An old habit is disappearing; it hurts. Slowly, slowly you will see your inner sky changing – from darkness to light, from loneliness to aloneness. Aloneness is the joy of being yourself. Loneliness is the misery of missing the other. Aloneness is positive, loneliness is negative.
And the man who can be alone, blissfully alone, becomes a buddha. The man who can be utterly alone has arrived home. His is the great benediction. He is a Sufi.

The third question:
Osho,
Can you please give me your car?
The question is from Hans Conard Zander. He is a reporter from Germany, he represents the famous magazine, Stern.
Coming from Germany and asking for an ordinary Mercedes-Benz? – it is like carrying coal to Newcastle. And this is the only question he has asked. Coming from Germany, from so far away, representing a very reputable, famous magazine, and only this question to ask? It shows much.
Hans Conrad Zander was a monk before he became a journalist. The repression must still be there. He has not asked about God, not about meditation, not about love, but he has asked about a car. The monk has not yet died.
This is the ugliness of monkhood: you impose certain things forcibly upon yourself. Your poverty is imposed. Your poverty is not your joy, it is your suffering.
Monks become poor because they are greedy. They want the joys of paradise later on. They figure out that this life is short – and particularly when you are a Christian you have only one life, just a short life. By the time you start thinking about life, half of it is already gone, so it is only a question of a few years, and then the eternal joys, forever and forever.
If Hans reaches paradise, the first thing that he will ask for will be a Mercedes-Benz! Coming to me, and asking such a stupid thing…
Hans, it is yours; you can take it away right now. But one thing I must tell you before you start taking it away: it does not belong to me. You may get into some legal trouble. As far as I am concerned, I am absolutely in agreement, you can take it away.
Nothing belongs to me. I have not a single pai with me, no bank account. You can see – I don’t even have pockets because there is nothing to put in them.
You can take it. It is just as if you ask me, “Can I take the moon?” I will say, “Of course you can take it. As far as I am concerned, I have no objection. You can take the moon.”
I have heard…

Two hippies were sitting under a tree getting very high, stoned. It was a full-moon night, and one hippie looked at the moon and said, “I would like to purchase it, whatever the cost. I am ready to pay for it, whatever the cost.”
The other said, “Forget all about it – because I am not selling it.”

My saying to you that you can take it would be as absurd because it does not belong to me at all. Nothing belongs to me. All that you see here belongs to this commune of sannyasins; I am just a guest. I am grateful to my sannyasins because they take every care of me. Otherwise, nothing belongs to me. Any day they can say, “Good-bye,” and I have to go.
But it shows much about your mind, what kind of mind you have been carrying.

The old lady was a strict teetotaler and always had a glass of milk with her meal. One day she went to a friend’s wedding and a practical joker put some gin in the old lady’s milk, unknown to her.
She sipped the milk, savored it, drank some more – and finally emptied the glass.
Then, with a smile on her face she said, “What a cow! What a cow!”

That’s what is happening to you: “What a car! What a car!” This is ugly. This is ugly because this type of mind can never be at ease, can never be relaxed, can never know the joys of existence. This kind of mind will always remain in misery. The more you hanker for things, the more miserable you will be.
And the hankering never comes to an end. You can have all the gadgets that modern technology has made available, and yet you will be in misery because more and more is coming every day. Even if you can get the whole world, still you will be miserable because the mind that asks for more goes on asking for more. If you have this world, the mind will start talking about the other world – how to possess the moon, how to have a plot there.
In Japan there is a travel agency that is selling tickets to the moon, and all the seats are already booked. The plane leaves on the first of January 1985; be in a hurry. They are asking fantastic prices for the tickets, and the tickets are being sold on the black market. That will be the first trip according to them. Anybody can go. Sooner or later you will see people making bungalows on the moon – and then those who don’t have a bungalow on the moon will suffer.
Without seeing this eternal, infinite obsession with “more,” people go on doing all kinds of things. They even become monks. Hans became a monk. He must have become a monk in order to get free of this whole desiring mind – but you cannot get free by becoming a monk. Then one day he must have become tired, so he dropped the robes of the monk and came back into the world. But that is not going to help. You can move from one extreme to the other. Understanding helps, not moving from one extreme to the other.

Kelly had been poverty-stricken all his life, but then an American relative left him a legacy of a million dollars. Kelly decided he would take things easy for the rest of his life.
One day he was out driving in his big car when he said to the chauffeur, “Drive over a stone, my good man. There is some ash on the end of my cigar.”

Now, taking life easy… People move from one extreme to the other, but they remain the same because understanding happens only in the middle.
Hans has been here for a few days, and he is very antagonistic to this place, very antagonistic to sannyasins. He told Prasad that because he has been a monk, he does not like the idea of sannyas at all. Now, this is without knowing that my sannyasins are not monks or nuns! My sannyasins are exactly in the middle: they are neither worldly nor otherworldly. They are exactly in the middle, settling in the middle, settling in a kind of balance.
Whatever you have, use it gratefully. Whenever you have it, use it gratefully, thankfully. When you don’t have it, use that not-having gratefully also. When you are poor, thank God that you are poor – because poverty has also a few joys of its own which no rich man can ever have. When you are rich, thank God that you are rich – because there are a few joys only rich people can have, that no poor man can ever have.
So I am neither for poverty and against richness, nor for richness and against poverty. I am for trust. The poor man wants to be rich: that is distrust. The rich man wants to be poor, thinks that maybe the poor man is enjoying something he is missing: that is distrust. I teach you that wherever you are, wherever you find yourself, enjoy whatever you have – enjoy it totally.
Sometimes if you have nothing to eat, rather than feeling hungry, make it a fast. That is the art of life. Why not transform it into a fast? Hunger can be transformed into a fast, and then it has a beauty of its own because it is no longer forced upon you. You have been artistic about it. Just a little touch of your meditation, and hunger becomes a fast. A fast has a beauty, hunger is just ugly. You were starving, you changed the face of starvation; you made it beautiful, you started celebrating it.
When you have something to eat, let it be a feast. Thank God. Wherever you are and whatever is available, feel thankful and prayerful.
But that is not the way people are living. They are constantly asking for that which they don’t have – and they will always be asking for that which they don’t have. Life is short, and there are millions of things they will always be missing. People don’t live in what they have, they live in what they don’t have. That’s why they live an empty life, and fullness never happens. Otherwise everybody is so rich, already so rich, that if he knows how to enjoy it, even emperors will feel jealous of him.
But coming here to report about this ashram, these beautiful people, this great experiment, and then asking about a car that you could have better asked about in Germany… German roads are full of Mercedes-Benzes, they are everywhere. It is a common car in Germany. But Hans, you must have a very, very repressed mind. And I am surprised that a magazine like Stern sends you here to investigate meditation. You should have been sent to a car garage!

The fourth question:
Osho,
Is not life nothing but misery?
It depends on you. Life in itself is an empty canvas, it becomes whatever you paint on it. You can paint misery, you can paint bliss.
This freedom is your glory. You can use this freedom in such a way that your whole life becomes a hell, or in such a way that your life becomes a thing of beauty, benediction, bliss, something heavenly. It all depends on you; man has every freedom. That’s why there is so much agony – because people are foolish and they don’t know what to paint on the canvas.
It is left up to you: that is the glory of man. That is one of the greatest gifts of existence to you. No other animal has been given the gift of being free, every animal is given an already fixed program. All animals are programmed except man. A dog is bound to be a dog, and forever a dog; nothing else is possible, there is no freedom. He is programmed, everything is built-in. The blueprint is there, he simply follows the blueprint. He will be a dog. There is no choice for him, no alternatives are available. He is an absolutely fixed entity.
Except for man, everything is programmed. The rose has to be a rose, the lotus has to be a lotus, a bird will have wings, an animal will walk on four legs.
Man is utterly free: that is the beauty of man, the glory. The immense gift of existence is freedom. You are left unprogrammed, you don’t carry a blueprint. You have to create yourself, you have to be self-creative. So it all depends on you: you can become a Buddha, a Bahauddin, or you can become an Adolf Hitler, a Benito Mussolini. You can become a murderer or a meditator. You can allow yourself to become a beautiful flowering of consciousness, or you can become a robot. But remember, you are responsible – and only you, and nobody else.

An optimist is a man who goes to the window in the morning and says, “Good morning, God”
A pessimist is one who goes to the window and says, “My God, is it morning?”

It all depends on you. It is the same morning, maybe the same window, maybe the pessimist and the optimist are staying in the same room – but it depends. And what a difference when you say, “Good morning, God,” and when you say, “My God, is it morning?”
I have heard an ancient Sufi parable…

Two disciples of a great master were walking in the garden of the master’s house. They were allowed to walk every day, morning and evening. The walking was a kind of meditation, a walking meditation, just as Zen people do walking meditation. You cannot sit for twenty-four hours. The legs need a little movement, the blood needs a little circulation, so in both Zen and in Sufism, you meditate for a few hours sitting, and then you start meditating walking. But the meditation continues; walking or sitting, the inner current remains the same.
They were both smokers. They both wanted to ask for the permission of the master, so they both decided, “Tomorrow… At the most, he will say no, but we are going to ask. And it doesn’t seem such a sacrilegious act to smoke in the garden. We will not be smoking in his house itself.”
The next day they met in the garden. One was furious – furious because the other was smoking – and he asked, “What happened? I also asked, but he simply flatly refused and said no. And you are smoking. Are you not abiding by his orders?”
The other said, “But he has said yes to me.”
This looked very unjust. The first said, “I will go and immediately inquire as to why he said no to me and yes to you.”
The other said, “Wait a minute. Please tell me what you asked.”
He said, “What I asked? I asked a simple thing, ‘Can I smoke while meditating?’ He said, ‘No!’ and he looked very angry.”
The other started laughing. He said, “Now I know what the matter is. I asked, ‘Can I meditate while smoking?’ He said, ‘Yes.’”

It all depends. Just a little difference, and life is totally something else. Now, there is a great difference. Asking, “Can I smoke while meditating?” is just ugly. But asking, “Can I meditate while smoking?” – it’s perfectly okay. Good! At least you will be meditating.
Life is neither misery nor bliss. Life is an empty canvas and one has to be very artistic about it.

A tramp knocked at the door of an inn named “George and the Dragon.”
“Could you spare a poor man a bite to eat?” he asked the woman who answered the door.
“No!” she screamed, slamming the door.
A few seconds later, the tramp knocked again.
The same woman answered the door.
“Could I have a bite to eat?” said the tramp.
“Get out, you good-for-nothing!” shouted the woman. “And don’t you ever come back!”
After a few minutes the tramp knocked at the door again.
The woman came to the door.
“Pardon,” said the tramp, “but could I have a few words with George this time?”

Life is the inn called “George and the Dragon.” You can ask to have a few words with George too.

The fifth question:
Osho,
As I read your books and hear your discourses you seem to misquote and take out of context the words of Sigmund Freud. What is your point, Osho? I don't understand the trickery involved.
Meeto, I am an ignorant man, as ignorant as Socrates and Bodhidharma. You will have to be patient with me. I am not a scholar, and what I am saying to you is not scholarly; it is just the opposite.
Just a few days ago there was a Jungian, and I said at that time, “Wait. Sooner or later, a Freudian will be coming.” And now the Freudian has come.
The Jungian was very angry, Meeto, because I had mentioned Jung’s name in the same breath with Freud’s. He was very angry. He said, “How can you dare to mention Freud’s name in the same breath with Jung’s – the great Jung? It is as wrong as somebody mentioning Adolf Hitler’s name in the same breath with Buddha’s.”
It is very unfortunate that the Jungian has left. Otherwise I would have told him to meet Meeto and have a good discussion.
I am not a scholar and I am not concerned with details. And my purpose here is not to inform you rightly; my purpose is not that of a professor. My purpose is not to inform you at all, but transform you. So it doesn’t matter. If it serves transformation, I can misquote. If it serves to hit you, your knowledge, your learnedness, I can do anything. The purpose is to hammer, the purpose is to shock you.
See the purpose. I am not reading a scholarly, learned paper about Freud. Sometimes it may look to you, if you are very learned and you have been reading books and Freudian psychology, and you have been concerned with small details… It will look difficult for you, but that’s really the purpose. If you can drop your knowledge and be mad with a madman like me, then something is going to happen to you. Freud is irrelevant.
You say that I quote out of context. Out of context or not, my whole purpose is single-pointed: to destroy your attachment to knowledge. And I will use all kinds of things. And I perfectly agree with Machiavelli as far as this thing is concerned – that any means is good if the end is good.
I have heard…

It is a joke of “fact and fiction,” involving two contemporary English poets, Ben Johnson and John Sylvester.
John Sylvester once told Ben Johnson, “Hey, Ben, you and I are famous poets. Let us now create a poem together. I shall construct the first line, you the next, I the third, you the fourth, and so on. Each line must rhyme perfectly with the other.”
Ben Johnson, suspecting mischief, said, “Okay John, go ahead.”
Sylvester recited his first line: “I, John Sylvester, kissed your sister,” and beamed.
An outraged Ben Johnson controlled his temper and calmly said, “I, Ben Johnson, slept with your wife.”
“Where is the rhyme?” fumed Sylvester.
“Rhyme or no rhyme, it is a bloody fact!” retorted Ben.

So, context or no context, it doesn’t matter – it is a bloody fact. My purpose is to destroy all attachment to words, to theories. If you are a Freudian, then I will misquote Freud; if you are a Jungian, I will misquote Jung; if you are an Adlerian, I will do the same to Adler. It doesn’t matter. Freud, Jung, Adler don’t matter. All that matters is that I have to destroy this constant obsession with words, theories, hypotheses.
But I know, scholars are scholars…

The young scholar walked into the pet shop and asked if he could buy 177 cockroaches, 55 beetles, 21 mice, and 7 rats.
“I am sorry, sir, but we can only supply the mice,” said the owner of the pet shop. “But, out of interest, what on earth do you want all those other creatures for?”
“Well, I got evicted from my flat this morning,” replied the young scholar, “and the landlord said that I must leave the place exactly as I found it.”

I am not that kind of a scholar. If sometimes you get angry, please forgive me.

In a small southern Louisiana country town, the teacher of the one-room school was giving the lesson of the day on American history. Asking questions of this little girl and that little boy and this little boy and that little girl, she came to a little boy named Beaudreaux, and she says, “Beaudreaux, who signed the Declaration of Independence – huh?”
Without batting an eye, Beaudreaux says, “Teacher, me – I don’t know. And that ain’t all, I don’t give a damn to know!”
Upset with Beaudreaux’s reply, the teacher instructed him to bring his father to school with him the next day. When Beaudreaux’s father arrived the next day, the teacher asked him to sit at the back of the room and just observe.
Continuing with the history lesson of the previous day, the teacher proceeded asking questions to this little girl and that little boy and this little boy and that little girl, and she came once again to Beaudreaux and she says, “Beaudreaux, who signed the Declaration of Independence – huh?”
The boy, as steady as the day before, says, “Teacher, it is just like I told you yesterday. Me…I don’t know. And that ain’t all, I don’t give a damn to know!”
Hearing this, Beaudreaux’s father jumped out of his chair, grabbed him by his collar and stiff-armed him outside. Obviously upset, but not knowing exactly what to do, the brief silent stare was broken when Beaudreaux’s father says, “Now, Beaudreaux, you know your momma ain’t got much learnin’, right? And me, I ain’t got that much. So if you signed that damn paper, you get in there and told that teacher!”

I am a very ignorant man. As ignorant as Socrates, as ignorant as Bodhidharma. Please be kind with me.

The sixth question:
Osho,
In the process of becoming more ordinary, what is happening to the ego?
One cannot become ordinary. No, that is not possible. One always becomes extraordinary. Even if you try to become ordinary, you will become extraordinary – maybe “extraordinarily ordinary,” but you will become extraordinary.
Becoming cannot lead you to ordinariness. Ordinariness is to drop the idea of becoming. When you stop becoming, you are ordinary. What is the idea of becoming? – to be somebody special.
And yes, remember the cunningness and cleverness of the mind and its subtle ways of deceiving. The egoistic person can try to become humble, but that’s where he misses the whole point. You cannot try to become humble. If you try, your humbleness will be nothing but a new camouflage for the old ego, a new painting, a new coat of paint on the old ego, a new dressing, a new decoration, a renovation – but the old continues. It is the ego that was trying to become humble, and when you become humble the ego will feel very gratified. The ego will say, “Look, now there is nobody else who is as humble as I am.” But this is ego, this is not humbleness.
The really egoless person is not humble at all. He is neither arrogant nor humble; he is simply himself. The humble person is just the egoist standing on his head, doing a shirshasana, a headstand, that’s all. Nothing has changed. Do you think when you stand on your head, something changes? You simply look foolish, silly, that’s all. You may think you are doing something great – Yoga, etcetera – all that happens is that you look silly. Nothing changes in you.
You have to understand the desire to become. Why do you want to become somebody? Even if that somebody, the idea, the ideal, is that of being humble, ordinary, even if the idea is that of becoming nobody – why do you want to become somebody in the first place? Can’t you be just that which you are? From where does this desire arise? Watch, analyze, diagnose the desire to become.
You are not satisfied, you are not contented; you are condemnatory toward yourself. You are not feeling that you are the way you should be. You are carrying many “shoulds” in your head, and those shoulds are creating the fever of becoming.
Who is ordinary? – one who is without the fever of shoulds. And that ordinariness is nothing but godliness. Only God is ordinary, and those who are ordinary become divine. But it does not happen through becoming, it happens by dropping all desire to become.
You ask me, “In the process of becoming more ordinary…” It is not a process. How can you become ordinary through a process? To become ordinary simply means you have dropped the very idea of becoming anybody – the idea of being ordinary is also included in it. You have dropped the very process, you have simply accepted the way you are: tathata, suchness. You start enjoying the way you are, the person you are. Whosoever you are, you start enjoying it, you are utterly contented with it.
This is ordinariness. This is not a process; this is a sudden revelation: “I have been chasing shadows, and because I have been chasing shadows I was suffering. I was missing the present moment, the herenow which contains all. And because I was chasing shadows, it was not possible to attain them, so there was frustration again and again, and again.”
Becoming means you are interested in the future, not in the present. Being is in the present, becoming needs the future. Becoming is always tomorrow; tomorrow you will be ordinary, and then you will enjoy bliss, consciousness, love – but tomorrow. And tomorrow never comes, it is always today.
Be like the trees, be like the animals, be like the birds. Somebody asked Jesus, “What is the secret of entering your Kingdom of God?” and he said, “Ask the lilies or the fish or the flowers. Ask!” What is the secret of a lily flower? What is the beauty of the poor lily? What is the richness of the poor lily? The richness is, it is always here and now; it knows only the present time. It knows nothing of the past and nothing of the future.
Remember: if you are interested in the future you will always remain attached to the past. Why? Because if you want to become somebody, from where will you get the knowledge to become? The knowledge will be supplied by the past, by your memory, by the skill you have learned, by all the experiences you have passed through. The knowledge will be supplied by the past, the know-how will be supplied by the past. If you are interested in the future, you will remain half in the past and half in the future – and this is the division that keeps you schizophrenic. If you are just herenow, the past is not needed.
See it. Think of it. Just this moment, see it. If you are interested just in this moment, no past is needed, no skill is needed, no memory is needed, no knowledge is needed. And if you are just herenow, where is becoming? You are a being.
To be is to be ordinary. To become is to be ill, to become is to be diseased, to become is to remain insane, split, schizophrenic.
But the ego is very subtle. You rush after money, you become frustrated: one day you say, “It is nonsense, only frustration comes. Now I don’t want to become extraordinary, I have tried enough. Now I will try to become ordinary.” But trying continues – the ego has deceived you.

A vain lion wanted to find out why the other animals were not as beautiful as he. First he asked a giraffe. The giraffe did not know. Next, the lion asked a bear. The bear had no answer. Then the lion asked a hippopotamus, and again got no answer.
Finally, the lion met a mouse. He asked the mouse, “Tell me, why aren’t you as big, as strong, and as beautiful as I am?”
The mouse looked up at the lion and said, “Well, I have been sick.”

The ego is very subtle: it finds explanations, rationalizations. It can’t allow you to see the truth. Even the mouse says, “Well, I have been sick.” Even the mouse cannot accept that he is just an ordinary mouse. No, not possible.
Watch the ways of the ego. It always comes from new dimensions. If you close one door, it comes from another door. If the front door is closed, it comes from the back door.
The man who really wants to know the truth will watch, will witness all the possible ways of the ego. Watching the possible ways of the ego again and again, a great understanding arises. One day suddenly you have seen all the games of the ego. In that very seeing, becoming is dropped. Becoming is the shadow of the ego. Becoming is the methodology of the ego.
Then you don’t want to become a saint, then you don’t want to become ordinary, then you don’t want to become humble, then you don’t want to become pure, then you don’t want to become anything. You don’t even want to become God; there is nothing you want to become. Becoming simply evaporates. And in that evaporation you are left alone, beautifully alone, totally alone, with no mind.
The mind is not needed at all for the being; it is needed only for becoming – it supplies methods, know-how, technology. It is not needed, it is irrelevant. Then it falls silent. In that silence you are ordinary. But it is not the end result of becoming. On the contrary, it is the disappearance of becoming.

The seventh question:
Osho,
We must be free. Yet where does freedom end and selfishness begin?
Freedom has to be understood. It is a very delicate matter, a very subtle matter, one of the most profound because freedom is equivalent to God.
That’s why Mahavira refused the existence of God – because he accepted the existence of freedom, and that was enough. He called ultimate freedom, moksha. Moksha means absolute freedom, ultimate freedom; then there is no need for God. Freedom is another name for God.
Three things have to be understood. First, there is a kind of freedom that you are acquainted with: that is freedom from. A child wants to be free from the parents. The slave wants to be free from the master, from the boss. This is freedom from; it is a reaction, it is the ego asserting itself. I am not saying there is anything wrong in it. You just have to watch the different colors of freedom.
When you are seeking freedom from, sooner or later you will fall into another trap – because it is a reaction and not an understanding. That’s what happened in all the revolutions in the past. In 1917 the poor masses of Russia revolted against the Czar, wanting to be free from czardom. And they became free just to become slaves again because they had no positive idea of freedom. Their idea of freedom was negative. Their whole interest was how to be free from the Czar. They forgot, they completely forgot, that just to be free from the Czar was not going to help; some other czar would be waiting.
The moment you are free from the old czar, the new czar will jump upon you, and the new will be more powerful. The new will create a far more dangerous slavery – because the new will know that you can revolt. You have revolted against the old; the new czar will have to make a better, stronger structure of slavery so that you cannot revolt anymore. He will be more cautious, obviously.
That’s what happened in Russia. Stalin proved to be a greater czar than all the czars put together. He massacred, murdered more people than all the czars put together. Even Ivan the Terrible was not so terrible as Josef Stalin proved to be. Stalin was not his real name, but given by the people. It was given in appreciation, but in fact it is not a compliment. Stalin means “a man of steel.” Yes, we call strong people, courageous people, men of steel. But in fact it proved to be just a derogatory thing: he proved to be a man without heart.
The real man of strength is not without heart – because without heart you are a machine, not a man. The real man of strength is hard as steel and as soft as a lotus petal. Only then has a real man attained. But Stalin was just steel, a robot – no heart, no compassion, no love. He killed millions of Russians, he created the greatest slavery yet in history. Even Adolf Hitler was far behind him.
Adolf Hitler had concentration camps, true, but Stalin made the whole country a concentration camp. Russia was a concentration camp, there was nothing else; the whole country was a concentration camp. Every single person was watched, people were put against each other. You could not even talk to your own wife honestly because who knows, she could report against you. You could not even talk to your children because they were members of the Youth League, they could report against you. And they were being taught, women were being taught, that the country, Communism, was the only value; everything else could be sacrificed for it. Small children were being taught to detect and spy on their fathers and mothers, on what they were talking about, and report it – because Communism was God. Everything else could be sacrificed.
The whole country became a concentration camp. People became afraid even to think because who knows, there may be some way of knowing your thoughts. There may be an electrode fixed inside your head – who knows? – which goes on broadcasting to the Communist Party what you are thinking.
Now it is possible, scientifically it is possible, to fix electrodes inside your head. You will never be aware of them because deep inside your skull there is no sensitivity. So if something is put there you will never know about it, you will not feel its presence. But it can go on reporting what you are thinking to the headquarters, it can give signals of what kind of thoughts are moving inside you. And there is every possibility that it is going to be practiced on people in Communist countries.
People revolted against the Czar just to fall into the hands and clutches of a far more dangerous czar. Russia seems to be the only country where there is no possibility of revolution, its very roots are cut. It seems impossible that Russia will ever go through a revolution again.
So when you are seeking freedom from… For example, if you are searching for freedom from the society, the established society, then you will fall into the trap of an alternative society. You will become a hippie or a yippie or something, and there you will again be in the same trap. If the established society wants you not to wear long hair, in the hippie community you will be asked to wear long hair. If you do not have long hair you will look odd. People will laugh at you, they will think you are a square. They will think you are stupid, that you are not a rebel. So if you are trying to escape from one slavery, you are bound to fall into another because your inner mechanism is already conditioned to being a slave. You can change masters, that’s all.
The Christian can become a Hindu, the Hindu can become a Mohammedan, the Mohammedan can become a Jew – it doesn’t matter. You only change masters, you remain the same. First you were dependent on the Hindu priest, now you are dependent on the Christian minister. First you were dependent on the Koran, now you depend on the Gita, but dependence continues. This is not true freedom. Freedom from is not true freedom.
Then there is another kind of freedom: freedom for. The second kind of freedom, which is far better than the first. The first is negative, the second is positive. One wants to be free to do something. For example, you want to be free of your family because you are in love with music. You are not really against the family. You are for the music and the family creates a hindrance, so you escape from the family. You are not against the family, against the parents, but they want you to become an engineer and you want to become a musician.
And it is good to be a musician even if you have to suffer for it. It is better to be a musician if you really want to be a musician, if you have a passion for it, than to be a successful engineer, rich, comfortable, safe. You can be safe, rich, comfortable, secure, but you will be dead if you do something which you never wanted to do. If you want to become a musician or a dancer or a poet and that is your passion, then go for it. You may be a beggar, you may never become known, you may never be rich – because the society does not need much poetry.
The society does not need much music, it needs more weapons to kill. It does not need poetry because poetry cannot be of much use in war. It needs atom bombs, hydrogen bombs. It needs soldiers, not sannyasins. It is a society based on hate, it is a society which is rooted in violence. It is a society which is greedy and lives through greed, ambition, lust – lust for power.
If you become a good ladder-climber your parents will be happy – although the ladder leads nowhere. One day suddenly when you have become the president of the country, on the last rung of the ladder, you will see the point. You have come to the highest and now it looks as if your whole life has been a waste because the ladder leads nowhere. You are just in the sky, hanging. You have not arrived anywhere.
But then to say, “This is not right” – because at least the people who have not arrived believe you have reached – to say, “I have not reached,” will need great guts. That’s what Buddha did when he renounced his kingdom. He said, “There is nothing.” That’s what Mahavira did when he renounced his kingdom, what Ibrahim did when he renounced his kingdom: he said, “There is nothing.” But these people are really courageous people.
Otherwise it looks so stupid. When everybody thinks you have reached, why say it? Why not let the illusion continue? And what is the point in saying that you have been after something which was absolutely absurd, ridiculous, that your whole life has been foolish? Why say it, why confess it? Just keep quiet. Go on holding on to the top, remain there till you die, but never tell the secret to anybody because that will prove that your whole life has been just a life of utter mediocrity, unintelligence.
If you want to be a musician or a poet, be a musician, be a poet. This is a second kind of freedom. At least you will be happy that you are doing your own thing, not somebody else’s thing. This is my experience: to be doing one’s own thing is the greatest joy in the world – whether that thing is appreciated by the society or not, valued by the society or not, whether it can be sold in the marketplace as a commodity or not. If it is the thing that you passionately desire, intensely desire, then do it; whatever the cost, sacrifice yourself for it.
This is the second kind of freedom: freedom for. This is a positive approach, better than the first. The first type of person becomes a politician. The second type of person becomes a poet, a painter, an artist. The first freedom is negative, the second freedom is positive. But remember, they are aspects of the same thing.
Even the first type of freedom at least pretends that there is some goal. Even the politician says, “We are fighting to be free from this kind of society, this kind of structure, this kind of politics. We are fighting to be free from this society just to create another society. We are fighting for some goal, some value, some utopia, some ideology.” Even he has to pretend that because the negative cannot exist alone; the positive has to be talked about, at least. So Communism talks about a classless society, utopia, where everything will be beautiful, where paradise will have descended on the earth. It will take infinity, but that goal has to be given. Otherwise people will not fight for a negative freedom.
So the negative implies the positive; and vice versa, the positive implies the negative. When you want to become a painter and your parents are not agreeing and your society thinks it is foolish, you have to fight with them. So freedom for will have something to do with freedom from; they are both together.
The real freedom is the third kind, the transcendental freedom. What is that? It is neither from nor for. It is simply freedom. It is just freedom. That is moksha: just freedom. Neither against anybody – it is not a reaction, nor to create a future. There is no goal. One simply enjoys being oneself, for its own sake. It is an end unto itself.
Freedom from creates the politician, the reformer, the social servant, the communist, the socialist, the fascist. Freedom for creates the artist, the painter, the poet, the dancer, the musician. And just freedom for its own sake creates the sannyasin, the spiritual person, the truly religious.
Your question is, “We must be free. Yet where does freedom end and selfishness begin?” The first two are selfish, ego-oriented. The first, freedom from, is very egoistic because it has to fight against. It is violent; it has to be very egoistic. It has to disobey, it has to destroy, it has to conspire against the status quo. It needs great ego. The politician is nothing but pure ego.
The second, freedom for, also has ego, but more delicate, more subtle, not so gross as the politician’s. The musician also has an ego, but more delicate, softer, more gentlemanly. The poet also has an ego, but nice, sweet, not so bitter as the first. They are both ego expressions.
Only in the third, pure freedom, neither against nor for, is there no ego and is there no selfishness – because the third freedom happens only when the ego has evaporated. If the ego is still there, the freedom may be either the first or the second. The third requires the phenomenon of the disappearance of the ego, fana, as basic. One has to understand the ego to attain the third freedom.
Watch the ways of the ego. Go on watching. There is no need to fight for, no need to fight against. There is only one need: to watch and be aware of how the ego functions, its mechanism. And slowly, slowly out of that awareness, one day the ego is found no longer. Because the ego can exist only in unawareness. When awareness comes and the light comes, the ego disappears like darkness. Then there is freedom. That freedom knows no ego.
And that freedom is love, and that freedom is God. That freedom is nirvana, that freedom is truth. In that freedom you exist in God, God exists in you. Then nothing wrong can ever happen through you. Then your life is virtue. Then your very breathing is meditation. Then you walk and it is poetry. Then you sit silently and it is dance. Then you are a blessing to the world. You are blessed and you can bless the whole world.
Enough for today.

============================================================

A man who had spent many years trying to puzzle out meanings went to see a Sufi and told him about his search.
The Sufi said, “Go away and ponder this – IHMN.”
The man went away. When he came back, the Sufi was dead.
“Now I shall never know the truth!” moaned the puzzler.
At that moment the Sufi’s chief disciple appeared.
”If,” he said, “you are worrying about the secret meaning of IHMN, I will tell you. It is the initials of the Persian phrase ‘In Huruf Maani Nadarad’ – which means, ‘These letters have no meaning.’”
“Why should I have been given such a task?” cried the puzzling man.
“Because when a donkey comes to you, you give him cabbages. That is his nutrition, no matter what he calls it. Donkeys probably think that they are doing something far more significant than eating cabbages.”
Religion is not a philosophical enterprise; it has nothing to do with the mind. Religion has no problems to be solved. It is not a question of thinking, it is a question of living. It is a question of going deeper into your being. It is not a question of an intellectual thought process but existential deepening in your own self. Religion has no question marks as philosophy has.
Philosophy is questioning, religion is a quest. The difference is great. If you think, you go on moving on the periphery. Thought has no profundity, thought is always superficial. It is like waves on the surface of the ocean. Waves cannot exist in the depth of the ocean, they can only exist on the surface.
Thinking is like waves on the surface of consciousness, and the question is to know the depth. You can go on chasing the waves, you will not attain anything. Your life will be a sheer waste.
But why does man go on thinking? When it is a question of getting into one’s own being, why does he keep clinging to the surface? It is out of fear; depth needs courage.
You will have to dive deep. Who knows what there is in the depth? You may disappear, you may not be able to come back again, you may melt. And the depth is dark, very dark. On the surface there is light, and on the surface there are many people just like you, you are not lonely. In the depth you will be alone. The deeper you go the more alone you will be. At the very center of your being there is just aloneness and nothing else. There you cannot take your friends, crowds, people. Until you are ready to go on this lonely pilgrimage, you continue thinking.
Thinking is a substitute, a substitute for something that is totally different: deepening. Thinking needs talent, deepening needs only courage. In the world of thinking you can prove your ego very easily. If you are articulate, a little logical, cunning, clever, calculating, you can become a great man. But in the depth no talent is needed. All that is needed is an immense courage to be alone.
That’s what meditation is all about. Meditation is just the diametrical opposite of thinking. Meditation is not thinking at all, it is a state of no-thought.
Philosophy is a substitute for religion. Those who go into philosophy are lost to religion, and those who want to go into religion have to drop all kinds of philosophizing.
Out of fear – out of the fear of being alone – thinking arises. It keeps you occupied, it keeps you engaged. And certainly you can always rationalize that your engagement in thoughts is of great significance. If you are thinking about God, naturally you can believe that you are thinking about something great. But whether you are thinking about God or about cabbages, it makes no difference at all; thinking is thinking. The object does not make any difference.
The transformation only happens when you drop thinking, when suddenly you are in a state of no-thought, no-mind. There are people who think about money; and people who think about power; and people who think about success; and there are people who think about God, prayer, meditation. But there is no difference at all. The object of thinking does not change the process of thinking. Let it sink deep into you.
Otherwise people simply go on changing their objects. If somebody is thinking of money we say he is a worldly man, and if somebody is thinking about God we say, “Look, what a religious man!” Both are worldly. The man who is thinking about God is also as much afraid of no-thought, of aloneness, as the man who is thinking of money: no difference at all.
Your gods and your ghosts, all are created out of fear. The people you find in the temples and churches and mosques praying, bowing down to the statues they themselves have made, are not in prayer, they are simply trembling with fear. It is out of fear that they have created the temples, it is out of fear that they have created a God. God is their ultimate companion. They never want to be alone, so they say, “When I die, my wife will leave me, my husband will leave me, my children will no longer be with me, the whole world will leave me – but God will be with me.” At least they can hope: “God will be with me. I will not be alone.” And religion starts happening only when you gather courage to be alone.
There is something like God, but that happens only to people who are ready to be alone. Aloneness brings you to your own divinity. Beware of the Gods that you have created out of fear.
A story…

Three men went up to a haunted house because they had heard there was a fortune there.
The first man went in while the two others remained outside. He saw some money on a table and started to put the money in his pocket, when he heard a voice say, “I am the ghost of the Holy Navel. Put the money back on the table!” The man ran out the back door.
The second man entered because the first took so long. He also saw the money on the table. As he started to put the money in his pocket, a strange voice said, “I am the ghost of the Holy Navel. Put the money back on the table!” This man also fled out the back door.
The third man got tired of waiting and he went inside. He saw the money. As he began to put the money in his pocket, a strange voice said, “I am the ghost of the Holy Navel. Put the money back on the table!”
But instead of running away, the man said, “I am the ghost of Davy Crockett, and I will put the money in my pocket!”
The ghost disappeared, and the man went out the front door a rich man.

Fear is the root cause of all your gods and all your ghosts. Fear is the root cause of how you created heaven and hell.
The other side of fear is greed. Wherever fear is, there is greed, wherever greed is, there is fear; they are two aspects of the same coin. So you have created ghosts and gods – ghosts out of fear, gods out of greed – and you have created hell and heaven. If you look deeply into your theologies, you will not find anything else but the psychology of fear and greed.
The true religion makes you free of fear and greed. And the only way to be free of fear and greed is to be able to be alone, is to be able to go in – into the darkness of your inner being, to move to the center.
We remain on the periphery, and the center is not far away. You do not have to travel long to reach the center. It can happen this very moment because it is your center. You may be keeping your back to it; just a hundred-and-eighty-degree turn and it is there. It has always been there, but you have not yet gathered enough courage to face yourself. You get involved in so many things: in relationships, in business, in power politics, in ambition. You go on getting involved in something or other just to avoid one single fact, and that is you.
This creates a double bind. Because you are avoiding yourself, you start creating a false self. You cannot live without a self. At least a nominal self, a nominal center is needed, otherwise you will fall apart, into pieces. Because you avoid the real self you have to create a false self; that is the ego.
The ego is a make-believe illusion, but very utilitarian. It gives you an idea of being centered, although that idea is very chaotic. The ego cannot really give you the idea of being centered. In the first place it is only a combination of many opinions that have been expressed about you by others. Somebody has said you are very great, and somebody has condemned you. Now both ideas are there. Somebody has said you are beautiful, and somebody has said that you are ugly. Now both ideas are there.
Your ego is a patchwork: all the opinions that have been expressed about you, good and bad, favorable, unfavorable, are collected there. Out of those ideas you have created a kind of person in your mind, an image: “Who am I?” This image is very hotchpotch. That’s why your life remains a chaos, a mess. And because this image has come from the outside, from people who don’t know your center – can’t know your center because even you don’t know your center, how can they? It is always something which is opposite to your real center. You become two persons instead of one. You become a duality. You are one thing, and you believe yourself to be something else. You do something; you think you are doing it because of one motivation, but there is some other motivation of which you are completely unaware. You can never become integrated. You go on becoming more and more schizophrenic.
I have heard…

There is a story about a spinster who had a habit of checking under the bed to see if it was safe to go to sleep. For years she went through this ritual of checking to make sure nobody was hiding there. After many years of doing this, one day she looked and, lo and behold, there was a man hiding under her bed.
She screamed from excitement and said, “So finally you are here!”

On the surface you are one thing, in the depths just the opposite. On the surface you may be a saint, in the depths a sinner. On the surface you may be very moral, and deep down you may be carrying all kinds of immoral desires. On the surface you may look always very happy, smiling, and deep down you may be just despair and nothing else.
This distance goes on growing and becomes bigger and bigger as you grow in life and in experience. By the time you die, you don’t die as one man, you die as a crowd. A child is born as a single individual, but by the time he is eighty and ready to die, he will certainly be two people. There is more possibility that he will be more than two – three, four, five, six, ten – nobody knows. He can be a crowd.
Just watch yourself and you will not find one single self in you, but many selves. You are multi-psychic, you have many minds, and each mind is fighting with your other minds. There is great competition inside, continuous quarrel. In that quarrel, in that conflict, you are dissipating energy – and when you dissipate energy in constant civil war you lose the zest for life. You lose all possibilities to be ecstatic, you lose joy.
William Blake is right when he says, “Energy is delight.” That’s a very profound statement. Yes, energy is delight, and the greater the energy you have, the greater will be your delight. It is energy that becomes delight; overflowing energy is delight, overflowing energy becomes celebration. When energy is dancing in you, in unison, in a deep harmony, in rhythm and flow, you become a blessing to the world.
But how can it happen if you are continuously fighting, and your whole energy goes into the fight? And nobody is going to win because all those selves are false. Only the true can win. Only truth is ever victorious, lies can never win. Yes, small battles maybe – one lie can win from another lie – but the ultimate war can never be won by a lie. It is won only by the truth. But we go on choosing this lie and that lie, and we never move toward the truth.
This is a very strange situation that man finds himself in, and this is everybody’s situation. Because we start thinking about life, life’s problems, life’s mysteries, we get trapped in scriptures, doctrines, theories. From where else are you going to get the answer? If you ask, “Who created the world?” now, how are you going to find the answer to who created the world? You were not present there when the world was created – if it ever was created. How are you going to find the answer to who created the world? One thing is certain: nobody could have been present because if somebody had been present, the world would have already been there. Nobody could have been present, so nobody could have been a witness.
Once you ask such a stupid question, which looks very, very intelligent: “Who created the world?” – almost every religious person goes on asking this – you are bound to fall into a trap. Then those cunning and calculating people who can answer it… All their answers are false because nobody can be a witness to it, and all their answers are contradictory to each other.
Mahavira says the world was never created. Now, how to believe whether he was right or not? Christians say the world was created exactly four thousand and four years before Jesus Christ was born, on the first of January, on Monday, in the early morning, at six o’clock. Now this is patently stupid because now we know, enough proofs are there, that the world has existed – at least this earth has existed – for millions of years. If the world was created four thousand four years before Jesus, that means the world has existed for only six thousand years. But the ruins of Harappa are seven thousand years old; it is scientifically proved. And we have found bones of animals which are millions of years old.
But you will be surprised at what Christians say. There was one Christian thinker who said God can do that: he made the world exactly four thousand and four years before Jesus. But God is omnipotent – he made bones that look millions of years old. And why did he make these bones? – just to test your trust. Those who are really trusting will trust, and those who doubt will fall into hell. Cunning people can always go on finding explanations.
To ask a question means you are ready to receive an answer from somebody. And whenever you receive an answer from somebody you are falling further and further away from the truth because truth can never be borrowed. Neither can the Vedas give it to you, nor the Koran, nor the Bible. Neither can Buddha give it to you, nor Mohammed, nor I. Nobody can give it to you.
Truth has to be discovered by everybody in his own being. You are the truth. “Ana’l haq!” Mansoor, the great Sufi, declared. “I am the truth!” But how can you declare this unless you have reached the very core of your being?
Because we ask such questions, we are supplied with answers. There is an economic law: wherever there is a demand, there will be a supply. Ask a stupid question and you will get a thousand and one stupid answers. And because you have asked the question, the question creates irritation; you cannot be satisfied unless you receive an answer. The question goes on haunting you, so you are bound to fall into the trap of a dogma, doctrine, scripture, priest, philosopher. You are bound to fall into somebody’s trap, and it is because of a wrong question.
The only right and religious question is one: “Who am I?” Because nobody can answer it, that’s why it is the only valid question. Only you can answer it. Nobody can say who you are, only you, and you too only when you go deep into yourself, beyond all the labels that are sticking on your surface: “I am a doctor,” “I am an engineer,” “I am a businessman,” “I am a professor,” “I am a Christian,” “I am a Hindu,” “I am a Catholic,” or a communist, socialist, “I am Indian,” or German, or Japanese.
When you start penetrating all these labels that have been stuck on you – they are many, layers upon layers. If you throw away one layer of labels you will find another layer of labels there – you will have to peel all these labels off. Man has become almost like an onion: you have to peel all the layers off, and only then, one day you will reach the center. That center is nothingness. Sufis call it fana: all is gone, all that you believed, all that you trusted, all those labels, gone.
You are no longer a Hindu and no longer a Mohammedan. You are no longer a communist, no longer a socialist. You are no longer this or that: neti-neti, neither this nor that. You have abandoned all those labels. You are not even a man or a woman – because consciousness cannot be man or woman. You are neither white nor black because that is only the pigment in the body. You are not the body either. Why? – because you can be conscious of the body. I can see my hand, that means the seer must be separate from the seen. I can observe my thoughts, so I am not my thoughts. I can watch my feelings, so I am not my feelings either.
You go on: “I am not this thing, I am not that thing.” You go on and on, then a moment comes when all things have been dropped. You are a no-thing; that means nothing.
Nothing is not a state of emptiness. Remember, nothing is not a state of emptiness, nothing simply means no-thing. You are a consciousness, not a thing. And consciousness cannot be reduced to anything whatever. It is irreducible. Consciousness cannot be made an object, it always remains your subjectivity. The deeper you go, the deeper you will find it is standing beyond and beyond and beyond. It is always the beyond, the transcendental.
It cannot be identified with anything: the body, the color, the race, the language, the religion, the church, the philosophy – no, not at all. All those things are borrowed. You have been told that you are a Hindu, so you believe that you are a Hindu. Just think: the day you were born, if you had been removed from your family and you were brought up by a Christian or a Mohammedan, would you have ever thought that you are a Hindu? And who knows, exactly the same thing might have happened. You might have been brought up by a Christian, but you might not have been born to a Christian family. You would not have ever been able to find it out, there would be no way. You would always think that you were a Christian, Mohammedan, Hindu, or whatever was told to you.
You are born as purity, a mirror; then things are imposed on you. The religious person has to unburden himself.

I am reminded of a minister who so thoroughly bored the members of his congregation that they finally asked him to leave.
“Give me one more chance,” he pleaded.
The congregation turned out in force the next Sunday and heard him deliver, to their surprise and delight, the most inspired sermon heard for years.
After the service, everyone shook his hand warmly. One man, an elder of the church, said, “You must stay, with an increase in salary, of course.”
The minister accepted. Then the elder said, “That was the greatest sermon I have ever heard. But tell me one thing. As you began to speak you raised two fingers of your left hand, at the end two fingers of your right hand. What was the significance of those gestures?”
“Those,” answered the minister, “were the quotation marks.”

Just look at yourself: whatever you are, whatever you think you are, is within quotation marks. You have been told. You are quoting others when you say, “I am a Hindu.” Your Hinduism is within quotation marks. When you say, “I am a communist,” you are again quoting others. You can believe in the Bible, or in Das Kapital, it doesn’t matter: you are a believer. Then you are not a true person. You have not yet known who you are. You are clinging to some information fed from the outside by others.
To discover oneself means to drop all quotation marks, to be utterly naked in the sun. Only then does one become religious, only then does one know one’s true center and being.
But people are wasting their energies in unnecessary questions. If you ask one question, you will get a thousand and one answers for it, and you will become more and more confused. If you believe in any answer, that answer is not going to satisfy either; it will create new questions.
For example, if you believe that God created the world, the question arises, “Why?” Nothing is solved. You were thinking, “My question, ‘Who created the world?’ will be solved if I can trust and believe that God created the world.” But now the question arises, “Why?” Why did he not create it before? What was he doing before he created the world? For eternity, just think, what was he doing? And why did he suddenly create the world four thousand and four years before Jesus? Why so suddenly? What happened, what motivation? Maybe an answer can be given to it; that is not going to help. New questions will arise. That is one of the indications of a false answer: it does not solve the basic question – on the contrary, it creates more questions.
Then the question arises, “Okay, he created the world for a certain reason, but why did he create such an ugly world, with so much suffering, with such poverty, illness, death? Why such an ugly world?” An answer will be supplied. He had created a beautiful world, but Adam created the original sin and that’s why we are suffering. But why did he create Adam in such a way that he was capable of committing the original sin? Ultimately he must be responsible for it. The tree is judged by the fruit; God has to be judged by his creation. If he has created this world, then he doesn’t look like much of a God. He looks more like a devil. Why did he create Adam with such desire, with such disobedience? And even if he had created Adam, why did he create the Tree of Knowledge in the Garden of Eden? At least he could have destroyed it, or not created it. Problems and problems… And for thousands of years man has been writing, thinking, puzzling about these things.
Sufis say this is all nonsense and only mediocre minds become interested in it. The really intelligent person simply gets out of all this rubbish.
But people go on asking in a kind of unawareness, not knowing why they are asking, not knowing what answers they will get, not knowing that each answer is going to create new problems. And the more problems they have, the more mediocre they become.
Everyone may not be as unaware as the owner of a large furniture store who was in Denmark to buy some stock. But still, everyone is unaware…

While on his business, he happened to meet in a hotel elevator a beautiful girl who gave him a friendly smile. The furniture store owner tried to become acquainted, even though neither could understand a word of the other’s language. He drew a picture of a taxi and she nodded her head in agreement, so they went for a ride in a taxi.
While riding in the cab he drew a picture of a table in a restaurant and again she nodded her head in agreement, so they went to a fine restaurant for dinner. After dinner he sketched two dancers and she was delighted. They went to a nightclub and had a lovely time.
Then the girl indicated she would like to use the pencil and paper, which he gave to her. She drew a picture of a four-poster bed.
The fellow was dumbfounded. As he said to a friend later, “You know, I never could figure out how that girl knew I was in the furniture business.”

Now, you can go on figuring it out your whole life. People are mediocre – not that they are born mediocre. Every child is born utterly intelligent, absolutely intelligent, but we destroy intelligence. That’s what we do with our children in the schools, colleges, universities. These are the factories where we create machines and destroy human beings. These are the factories for miseducation, where we go on throwing more and more information into the child without ever helping him to become more aware, more meditative, more silent. We never teach the child how to be silent, how to be alone, how to sit by a tree sometimes and just be still. Just still, watching the green of the trees and the red of the trees and the gold of the trees, and the sun, and the birds on the wing. Just simply being there, utterly silent, not doing a thing. Not thinking, just being; breathing in great joy, in great gratitude. We never teach children how to be open to existence.
All that we do in the schools and the universities is to go on pouring necessary and unnecessary information into their heads. And it is no wonder that when a person returns from the university, he comes home a mediocre person. It is very rare to come back from the university and still be intelligent, very rare. Very fortunate are the people who can escape from a university without being harmed by it. The university creates computers, not human beings. Its whole effort is how to make you useful as a clerk, as a collector, as a stationmaster. It has no concern with your heart, with your being; it has no concern with your life. All that it teaches is how to earn your living – but to earn your living is not equivalent to being alive.
To be alive needs something more, something deeper, something more profound. To be alive needs more awareness, more meditativeness, more consciousness, not more information.
Intelligence is intrinsic to every human being, and not only to every human being, to everything that exists. To trees – trees are utterly intelligent; of course they have a different dimension of intelligence. And so do the animals and the birds. In a way, their intelligence remains pure, it is not contaminated. Man’s intelligence becomes contaminated.
By the time the child is four years of age he has lost the real zest for life, love for life, joy of life. He has lost something immensely valuable. It has been replaced by plastic things. He is now being forced to become a parrot. He will simply repeat, now his whole life will be a repetition. He will be a gramophone record.

Two men who had been boyhood companions were reunited after many years. One was a preacher, the other a sailor. Each was the proud owner of a parrot.
In the interests of science, the two birds were placed in the same room, and the preacher’s parrot immediately asked, “What must we do to be saved?”
“Man the pumps and work like hell, or we will all go down with the ship,” replied the sailor’s pet.

This is how you are doing things, not a little bit differently, just exactly like that. The preacher’s parrot has been listening again and again to the preacher, the priest: “What must we do to be saved?” He has learned it. He does not know the meaning of it, he cannot know the meaning of it, but he can repeat the words. And the sailor’s pet answered, “Man the pumps and work like hell, or we will all go down with the ship.” He has also heard continuously, “Man the pumps and work like hell, or we will all go down with the ship.” Both are simply repeating without any meaning.
Watch yourself, how you go on repeating what your parents have told you, what your teachers have told you, what your priests have told you, what your politicians have told you. Watch! And if you really want to become intelligent – and you will not be really alive if you are not intelligent – then drop all those repetitions. It is better to be ignorant than to have borrowed knowledge because ignorance has a beauty of its own, it is innocence. Knowledge is ugly if it is borrowed, it makes you a gramophone record, “His Master’s Voice.” You go on repeating your whole life. Even parrots are not that unintelligent.

An old maid who enjoyed the companionship of a profane parrot was in the habit of receiving a visit from her pastor each Monday. Before the reverend gentleman arrived, the maiden lady would throw a cloth over the parrot’s cage.
It happened after one such visit that the preacher had occasion to call again the following day. Seeing him on the porch, the old maid hastily threw the cloth over her pet’s cage.
As the minister entered the room, the parrot remarked, “This has been a damn short week!”

Even parrots are not as unintelligent as your so-called knowledgeable people are. Intelligence is a mirrorlike quality in your consciousness; it reflects that which is. It has no past, it has no future, it has only present. Intelligence lives in the present. Knowledge lives in the past and hopes for the future, and goes on missing the present. No mirror can reflect the past – or do you think it can? The mirror cannot reflect the woman who was looking in the mirror yesterday. She is gone, and it is gone. The mirror cannot reflect what is going to happen tomorrow. That which is not yet, is not yet. The mirror only reflects this moment, whatever is.
Intelligence reflects whatever is, knowledge goes on repeating the past and fantasizing about the future. It is because of knowledge that you are missing your life.
Sufis call these people donkeys. Why do they call them donkeys? – because a donkey can carry all the scriptures and yet will remain unaware of what he is carrying. He will not know the meaning. A donkey can carry the Koran, the Veda, the Gita, the Bible. You can load all the great scriptures of the world on the donkey and the donkey will carry them, and may even feel very egoistic: “Look! I am no ordinary donkey, I am carrying all the great scriptures of the world” – but a donkey is a donkey. He does not know any meaning.
That is the situation of a pundit, of your so-called learned people. Sufis call them donkeys. In a subtle way they are carrying the Vedas, the Korans, the Bibles, but they don’t know the meaning – because the meaning cannot be known through study, the meaning cannot be known through words. The meaning can only be known by experience.
You cannot know the meaning of Jesus’ words by studying the Bible and all the commentaries on it. You can know the meaning of Jesus’ words only when you attain Christ consciousness, when you become a Christ. And remember, to become a Christian is not to become a Christ. Christian means a plastic flower, Christ means a real rose. The Christian is an imitation, an imitation of Christ. That is the title of one of the most famous Christian books, Thomas A. Kempis’ Imitation of Christ. How can you imitate Christ? And if you imitate, you will not be Christ; certainly you will not be Christ, you will be only a carbon copy. You will not have any authenticity, you will not have any original experience of your own. You will be a parrot, a gramophone record: “His Master’s Voice.”
You can understand the Bible only when you have become a Christ because those words were uttered in that state of consciousness. Unless you attain that state of consciousness you will not be able to know the meaning. And by “meaning,” I do not mean the dictionary meaning. Dictionaries are there, and you can look into the dictionaries and you can find the meaning, but that is not the real meaning. Those meanings are only synonyms, they replace one word with another word.
For example, what is the meaning of love? You can go into the dictionary and you can find many meanings of love – profane love and sacred love, and the love of the mother for the child, and the love of the husband for the wife, and the love of the disciple for the master. You can have all those meanings in the dictionary. But unless you taste something of love, unless you fall in love yourself, unless you become soaked with love, unless your heart throbs with love, your heart sings with love, unless you feel the dance of love happening within you, you will not know the real meaning. The meaning has to be existential.
Today’s story:
A man who had spent many years trying to puzzle out meanings went to see a Sufi and told him about his search.
Every single word has to be meditated upon. A man who had spent many years trying to puzzle out meanings… There are many people, and they are very respectable because people think they are doing something great: philosophers, thinkers, theologians. They are simply wasting their life, and wasting it to no purpose. They go on seeking and searching for meaning in words, they become very, very skillful about words, but all that they know are words. Their words are empty. This man: …had spent many years trying to puzzle out meanings…
Once a man came to me. For thirty years he had been searching the lives of Buddha and Mahavira for only one single thing: who was older? They were contemporaries, and the records are puzzling and confusing because the people of those days were not very interested in records. They were not interested in so-called history at all. Their interest was far deeper. They were not interested in the personality of Buddha, his body, where he was born, the exact date, etcetera. They were more interested in what had happened in his consciousness. Their records are very accurate as far as Buddha’s enlightenment is concerned, but their records about his physical birth, his physical death, how long he really lived, are just very confusing.
So is the case with Mahavira. There are records which say Mahavira was older, and it can be proved that he was older because he never mentioned Buddha. But Buddha criticized Mahavira many times. That means Mahavira must have been very old, already respected, recognized. Buddha must have been very young, and he had to fight his way. He must have criticized Mahavira. Mahavira must have kept silent because who bothers about a young man? Let him speak, it doesn’t matter. But there are books which say that Buddha was older and Mahavira was younger; they can also prove it.
Proofs are very easy. The same thing can be used to prove just the opposite – and the same thing has been used. Those who think that Buddha was older say that he was angry with Mahavira because he was younger and was trying to convert his disciples; that’s why he was angry and he criticized Mahavira. Mahavira did not bother. Who bothers about an old man? “He will be here just a few days, and gone.” He went on working on his own. And he had everything to gain because he had no disciples that Buddha could take away, but he could take away Buddha’s disciples. Buddha must have been angry.
That is how people go on thinking. Both kinds of people miss. They don’t understand either Mahavira or Buddha – because neither could Mahavira be angry, nor could Buddha be angry. And neither of them could be interested in converting others’ disciples. But this is how scholars think. It is their minds that come in. It says something about the so-called scholars and the historians.
This man who came to me – he was a well-known man, had written many books, particularly on Mahavira and Buddha – for thirty years his whole problem had been how to decide who was older. He asked me, “Can you shed some light on this problem: who was older?”
I said, “Bothering about that is just rubbish. Why should I waste my time on who was older? And how does it matter in any way? It is not going to affect what Buddha was, whether he was three years older than Mahavira or ten years younger. Neither is it going to affect Mahavira’s vision. But why have you wasted thirty years? Your thirty years have just gone down the drain. If some day you come across Buddha and Mahavira, they will laugh. They will say, ‘You are a fool! Why have you wasted your thirty years? And you are getting old; any day you will die. When are you going to become a buddha on your own?’”
He was shocked – because nobody had been so hard on him. For a moment he could not speak a single word. But he was an intelligent man, he recognized the truth. He said, “Perhaps you are right. But nobody ever told me this; everybody appreciated my work, that I am doing great research. You are the first person who has been so hard on me. But I can see the point; my thirty years are lost.”
And within just six or seven months from the day he saw me, he was dead. So his whole life was gone, and he had been thinking he was doing great research.
There are millions of people, your universities are full of such people: they strut about and brag about how many PhDs and DLitts they have, and how many papers they have published in great academic journals. But if you look into their work you will be surprised; it is just trivia, utterly meaningless.
This man must have been a philosopher. He: …had spent many years trying to puzzle out meanings, went to see a Sufi and told him about his search.
Now, a Sufi is just the opposite of a philosopher. A Sufi is one who is not concerned with words at all. A Sufi is one who is not interested in scriptures at all. A Sufi is one who is interested in going into existence itself. He does not want to bother about the word beauty, he wants to experience beauty itself. He is not concerned about the word water, he is thirsty and he wants to drink water. His interest is in drinking, his interest is existential.
He: …told him about his search. The Sufi must have laughed inside. This is not a search at all! The search has to be inward; the search has to be into reality, into that which is, not into words and puzzles. All the searching into words and theories keeps you away from the real search.
The Sufi said, “Go away and ponder this – IHMN.”
The man must have felt very happy; so now he had a real puzzle from a real Sufi. He must have really rejoiced. He must have pondered over it.
It was just a koan, just as Zen masters give koans: “Go and ponder over the sound of one hand clapping,” or “Go and meditate on the original face that you had before your parents were born.” Now, what kind of face did you have before your parents were born? Not even you, but your parents, even they were not in existence. Then, what face did you have? That is your original face. Go and ponder over it. Absurd, you cannot figure it out… The whole point is to give you something absurd, to make you aware that your whole life you have been doing such absurd things and thinking that you were doing some great research or search, that you were a spiritual seeker.
Now see the point. The Sufi says: “Go away and ponder this – IHMN.” And that man did not even ask what it was!
That’s what he had been doing his whole life. It must have fallen in harmony with his mind. He must have been intrigued, tremendously thrilled: “Now this is a real puzzle and I will show this Sufi that I can find out the answer to it.”
The man went away. When he came back, the Sufi was dead.
Remember, if you come across a master, don’t miss the opportunity because the next time you come, the master may not be there. Life is fleeting.
He missed a great occasion. He was face-to-face with a master who could have guided him into the innermost mysteries of life, but he became satisfied with a toy, a meaningless thing. He could have become a disciple. Instead of becoming a disciple he was perfectly satisfied with something utterly foolish, and he did not even ask what it was. That would have been against his intellectual ego; he would find out himself.
There are people who come here, but they would not like to get involved in the experiment that is going on here. They remain outsiders, spectators, because they believe that they can work it out on their own. Why should they get involved? They should watch from the outside, find a few clues, and then escape. Those clues will all be rubbish, they will be like IHMN. A few people come here and they become very scared.
Just a few days ago a famous Dutch actor, writer, a well-known person in Holland, came, and started being afraid. He had come with the idea of becoming a sannyasin, not exactly knowing what it meant. He must have thought that it was just a formality. Watching here, seeing sannyasins committed, devoted to a great inner search, he became more and more afraid. He had come with a friend; the friend is now a sannyasin.
When his friend took sannyas he was there, and in that darshan, two, three times, he started weeping. When his friend was taking sannyas, tears were flowing from his eyes: a great turmoil – to be or not to be, to take the jump or not, a constant hesitation. His innermost core wanted to get involved, but his worldly-wise mind was afraid, thinking, “What will happen back home? Moving in orange in Holland? People will think that I have gone mad.” And he is well-known.
That is the trouble when you become well-known. When you are famous you are more of a prisoner than you are a free man, because then you have to look at what people will think because your prestige is at stake. It is good to be a nobody, you can move into the search easily. When you are somebody, the fear arises. The fear is not spiritual, the fear is very worldly.
For two lectures he was here, crying, weeping, and then he even became afraid to come to the lectures. Then yesterday he suddenly escaped from Pune, went to Nepal. That is just out of fear. He seems to be an intelligent person, but is using his intelligence in a wrong way.
The day he was at darshan I could feel his heart. He has a heart, the heart is not dead yet. Just a little caring, just a little watering, a little better soil – that sannyas could have provided easily – a little meditation and he would have become a totally transformed person. He would have been on the wing. But he has missed. And I know he will have to come back.
But then, who knows? I may be here, I may not be here. But he has missed this opportunity. And he is not a young man, he is getting old. Maybe I will be here; he may not be able to come back, he may not be here tomorrow. Life is very precarious. To come across a master and to miss the master is the greatest accident, very unfortunate, that can happen to a man.
And remember, this has been happening to all of you – because many of you were there when Buddha was on the earth, and many of you were there when Jesus was crucified, and many of you were there when Lao Tzu was alive, and many of you must have come across many masters. Because you are not new ones, you have been here as long as existence has been here; you are ancient ones. But you have missed. And you can always find explanations for missing.
Now, this man is to be really pitied. He was so close to the flame. A little more courage and he himself would have become aflame, but he missed. He went with a toy: IHMN. So foolish, but that’s how it happens.
You go to a master and you want something without risking anything at all. Nothing can be attained without risk. You have to pay for everything. And when you want truth, you have to pay with your totality, with your whole being.
The man went away. When he came back, the Sufi was dead.
“Now I shall never know the truth,” moaned the puzzler.
At that moment the Sufi’s chief disciple appeared.
“If,” he said, ”you are worrying about the secret meaning of IHMN, I will tell you. It is the initials of the Persian phrase ‘In Huruf Maani Nadarad’ – which means, ‘These letters have no meaning.’”
Sometimes – and it happens to almost all – you become puzzled by such stupid things that later on you will laugh at yourself. You will find it very ridiculous; why did you become so interested in such a thing?
Just watch your own questions. How many of them are just useless? And why do you go on pondering over them? Why do you go on feeding them with your energy? Why do you go on carrying their load? Just watch for twenty-four hours, take note. You will be surprised: ninety-five percent of the load can be dropped right now, and you will feel such great freedom.
But the problem is that the ego always wants problems. It exists through problems. If there is a problem to solve, the ego has some work to do. If there is no problem to solve, the ego has nothing to do, and when there is nothing to do the ego starts dying. The ego is a great doer.
That’s why all real masters in the world have been telling you that meditation is nothing but a state of non-doing, a state of passivity. Sitting silently, doing nothing, and the spring comes, and the grass grows by itself. Meditation is not something which you have to do, it is something which you have to be. It is a state of non-doing, it is a state of utter receptivity. Only then does the ego die.
That’s why the ego is not interested in meditation. It is perfectly interested in chanting a mantra, and that mantra will be nothing but IHMN. It is perfectly happy with just something to do; give it something to do and it is perfectly happy.
And it creates mountains out of molehills. It makes small problems very big. It is a very great magnifying glass; ants start looking just like elephants. Then you have much work to do. Because if there is only an ant, what work is there? The ego is not much interested in the ant, it needs elephants. It makes mountains out of molehills.
I have heard…

Mrs. Smith’s husband was of a nervous disposition and somewhat inclined toward hypochondria. From time to time he would be taken with strange ailments which for some reason or another never developed into anything fatal.
But one morning, just at breakfast time, it appeared that Mr. Smith’s time had come. He staggered out of his bedroom with ashen face and terror-stricken eyes. His body was bent forward in the shape of a parenthesis.
“Ah, Carrie!” he wailed, “it has come just like expected. I am due to be an invalid the rest of my days.”
“Henry!” shrieked Mrs. Smith. “What on earth has happened?”
“It came on while I was dressing. All of a sudden I found that I could not lift my head. I could not straighten up. Now I feel that I am actually being drawn double.”
“Are you in great pain?”
“No, no pain at all, it is probably paralysis! Run for a doctor!”
Mrs. Smith flew. In a few moments she was back with the family physician, and entering the room where her husband lay, she stood by, wringing her hands while the doctor made an examination. Suddenly the doctor’s shoulders began to quiver and heave.
“Ah, doctor, is there any hope?”
“Why yes, Mrs. Smith, there is,” said the doctor presently. “In fact, his condition should improve rapidly after he has unhitched the third buttonhole of his vest from the top button of his trousers.”

All your problems are like that. Sometimes a very small problem is magnified by your ego – because the ego always likes big things. It lives on big things, it is not interested in small things.
The chief disciple said, “Don’t be worried.”
“If you are worrying about the secret meaning of IHMN, I will tell you.
It is the initials of the Persian phrase ‘In Huruf Maani Nadarad’ – which means, ‘These letters have no meaning at all.’”
“But why should I have been given such a task?” cried the puzzling man.
”Because, when a donkey comes to you, you give him cabbages. That is his nutrition, no matter what he calls it. Donkeys probably think that they are doing something far more significant than eating cabbages.”
The master had to give something stupid to this man because the man could not have understood anything better than that. You get only that which you deserve because nothing more can be absorbed by you.
Remember it always: you have to be worthy to get something better. The master is always just. He is ready to give you as much as you can take, but he cannot give you more. You will not be able to understand it; in fact, you will misunderstand it. You may misuse it, you may harm yourself with it. Because anything that you cannot absorb, cannot digest, becomes poisonous to your system. The master has to be careful to give you only that which you can absorb. If you can eat only cabbages, then only cabbages will be given to you.
The disciple is one who prepares himself, who prepares to receive more. He does not demand because demands cannot be fulfilled. You can demand anything which may not have any relevance to your being. The donkey can demand anything – which may not prove nutritious, which may not be nourishing, which may even be poisonous. But the master has to give only that which you need in a particular moment.
If you need a shock he will give you a shock; if you need a good beating he will give you a good beating; if you need love he will give you love; if you don’t need love in a certain moment he will ignore you, he will completely forget about you, as if you don’t exist at all. But whatever is your need, the master fulfills it. He does not fulfill your demands, remember.
And the person who fulfills your demands is not a master. He is dangerous. Beware of him because he does not know your real needs. He cannot be any help to your growth. It is a long journey, a perilous journey too, hazardous. The path is an uphill, mountainous track; there is every possibility – a slight mistake and you will fall into the ditch, or you will disappear into the valley. It is a narrow path. It is a razor’s edge.
The master has to be very careful to give you only that which you are capable of absorbing. If you absorb it, more will be given to you. You will never be loaded. The master gives nourishment, not weight, because the weight will become a hindrance to your progress. He does not give you knowledge, he gives you only hints; then you have to work upon those hints. But you always receive that which you need, never less, never more.
If you are blind the master will not talk about light; that would not be of any help to you. If you are deaf the master will not talk about music and will not play his flute; that would be useless. First your eyes have to be opened. And remember: nobody is blind. People are only blindfolded, so the blindfold can be removed.
The real master will not talk about light but will try in every way to remove the blindfold. But the problem is that you may resist because you may think that your blindfold is a protection to your eyes. Your ears may be blocked but you may think that it is a safeguard, that it doesn’t allow unnecessary sounds to enter you. You may have the idea that sounds are dangerous, or light is dangerous.
People are living with so many misguides, with miseducation, with so many false ideologies, but still they have many opinions. It is very rare to find a man who has no opinions.
The master first has to take all misguidance, all miseducation, all opinions, away from you. Those are your blindfolds. Otherwise it is playing music to a deaf person or bringing light to a blind man. It is utterly futile, and no master ever engages in futile activity.

A young lady sat next to a distinguished bishop at a church dinner. She was somewhat modest and diffident, and was rather awed by the bishop’s presence. For some time she hesitated to speak to him, waiting for what she considered a favorable opportunity. Finally, seeing some bananas passed, she turned to him and said,
“I beg your pardon, but are you fond of bananas?”
The bishop was slightly deaf, and leaning forward, asked, “What did you say?”
“I said,” repeated the young lady, blushing, “are you fond of bananas?”
The bishop thought a moment and then said, “If you want my honest opinion, I have always preferred the old-fashioned nightshirt.”

If you are talking to a deaf person, remember not to use words like bananas; he may think you are talking about pajamas.
You have to take every care – with whom you are talking, what you are saying, what it is going to become in him – because what you say is not the point, what will be heard is the point. What you give is not the point, what will be received is the point, and it is not necessary that whatever is given will be received. In the very exchange, things change. One thing is said, another thing is heard; one thing is given, another thing reaches.
The master is very careful, he gives only that which can reach you. The first thing is to make a contact with you.
This man missed from the very beginning. If he had been a little alert, the first thing, the first intelligent thing to inquire about would have been, “What is this IHMN?” He simply went away and started pondering over it. He relied too much on his own ego. He must have thought, “I have been working so many years thinking about puzzles, riddles, problems. I will solve this.” He was not even anxious to know what it exactly was.
A great Sufi parable is…

A king wanted to appoint a prime minister. Four great thinkers of the country were called. They were put into a room. They were told that the door was going to be locked and the lock was not an ordinary lock, it was a mathematical puzzle: “Unless you solve the puzzle you will not be able to open it. If you solve the puzzle you will be able to open the lock and come out.”
The king went out, closed the door. Three persons out of the four started immediately working. They had brought papers and they had brought a few guidebooks, and they started working hard. There were a few numbers written on the lock; they looked at the numbers, they noted down the numbers. They started working out the problem, what the problem was.
The fourth simply sat in the corner. The three others thought him to be mad: “What is he doing?” He was sitting there with closed eyes. After a few minutes he stood up, went to the door, pushed the door – and it opened! He went out.
All those three were engaged, continuously engaged. They didn’t even see what had happened, that one man was already out.
When the king came with the man, he said, “Now stop your activity. The examination is over. I have chosen my prime minister. This is the man.”
They could not believe their eyes. They said, “What has happened? He was not doing anything, he was just sitting in the corner. How could he solve it?”
The man said, “There was no problem. I simply sat there and the first thing, the basic thing, was to know whether the lock was locked or not. The moment I came to feel that, I simply meditated silently. I just gathered my consciousness together, I became completely quiet. From where to start? The first thing an intelligent person would ask was whether there was really a problem or not. If there was a problem it could be solved. If there was no problem how could it be solved? – and if one starts solving, one is going into an infinite regress; one will never be out of it. So I just went to check whether the door was really closed, and it was not closed.”
The king said, “Yes, that was the trick: there was no lock. The door was not closed, it was left open. I was waiting for the man who would ask the first real question. You accepted the puzzle and you started solving it; that was where you missed. You could not have solved it even if you had worked for your whole life. This man knows how to be aware in a situation. He asked the right first question.”

The seeker, the so-called seeker, missed. The right first question was to ask, “What is this IHMN?” and the whole story would have been totally different; but he went to solve it.
Now, the disciple said, “There is no problem. It simply means: ‘These letters have no meaning…’ and you were searching for meaning.”
In fact, no letters have meaning. Meaning is in life, not in words. Meaning is in living, not in scriptures. Meaning is in love, not in the word love. Meaning is in loving.
Change the gestalt: that is the message of the story. Change your mind from words to life itself. Become more existential. Had he asked the right question, he would not have missed the master.
Now he asked the disciple. “But why should I have been given such a task?” cried the puzzling man. “Because, when a donkey comes to you, you give him cabbages.”
“You were a donkey and nothing more. You were a very scholarly, learned man, knowledgeable: you were a donkey.” That is the Sufi meaning of the word donkey: one who carries a great weight of knowledge. “The master knew you, he recognized you immediately, he respected your donkeyhood. He simply gave you cabbages. That’s how a donkey has to be received. This was just a cabbage.”
That is his nutrition… “And you were happy, and you went away with great gratitude toward the master.”
…no matter what he calls it. “You called it a great puzzle given by a great Sufi master, but it was simply cabbage. You meditated over it, but it was nonsense. One cannot meditate over it, there is nothing to meditate over.”
That is the meaning of a Zen koan: there is nothing to meditate over in it. Sometimes it has happened that the master gave the koan, “What is the sound of one hand clapping?” and the seeker simply slapped the master. And the master laughed. He said, “There is no need for you to meditate over it. You already know the answer!”
This is the answer. When a master gives you a koan, go and meditate. What is the sound of one hand? This is the answer, but you cannot imitate it. If you just imitate it you will be caught. If it happens spontaneously – “What nonsense!” and the seeker simply slaps the master, and he says, “What are you trying to do with me, make a fool of me? Stop playing games with me! I have come here to really seek” – that is the beginning of right disciplehood. He is not hitting the master out of disrespect, not at all. He is simply saying to the master, “Don’t play games with me. Don’t befool me. I don’t need cabbages, I am not a donkey. These cabbages may have worked for other donkeys but they will not work for me. I need real nutrition.”
“Donkeys probably think that they are doing something far more significant than eating cabbages.” That’s what the donkeys in the universities and the colleges and research centers and great academies think, that they are doing something great. They are simply eating cabbage, that is their nutrition. They are struggling, fighting about small matters: who was older, Buddha or Mahavira; whether Krishna ever existed or not; whether Jesus is a myth or a historical person. This is all nonsense.
The real thing is one: when am I going to become authentic, true, original; when am I going to know myself; when will I be able to answer the question, “Who am I?”? That is the only religious question, all other questions are false. And if you have asked the one question, the basic question, the answer is hidden in the question itself.
If you go on asking deep inside yourself, “Who am I?” and you don’t accept any false answer given by the mind, from the labels attached to you – that you are this or that, a Hindu, Mohammedan, communist, Catholic, man, woman, beautiful, ugly, old, young, body, mind – if you don’t accept any answer given by the mind and you go on asking and asking, and the question penetrates your heart like an arrow and goes deeper and deeper to the ultimate core, there, suddenly, is the explosion.
Not that you will hear a voice saying who you are. There is nobody. But you have come to your source; you have tasted it, you have known it, you have experienced it. And with that one question solved, all questions disappear. That one experience is the experience of God. It liberates. It is truth.
Truth is in your being, but you can find it only by becoming a quest, an intense, passionate longing to know yourself.
Drop all other unnecessary questions. Only one question is relevant: Who am I?
Enough for today.

============================================================

The first question:
Osho,
I too, then, am a donkey. If you had given me IHMN to meditate over, I would have silently accepted it out of trust that you were giving me what I needed. Or is it a matter of trust? Can you please explain the right attitude of a disciple receiving instruction from the master?
The moment you recognize that you are ignorant, you are no longer ignorant – because only intelligence can see the point of your own stupidity. The stupid person cannot see it; that’s why he is stupid. The most fundamental stupidity is that you cannot see it. When you start seeing your unintelligence, intelligence is arising in you. When you start recognizing your confusion, you are becoming clear. Otherwise who will recognize the confusion? You are becoming separate from the confusion.
You say, “I too, then, am a donkey.” If you can really see it, then you are no longer. Then the first ray of intelligence has penetrated you. No donkey can accept it, the donkey will make much fuss about it. If you tell the donkey, “You are a donkey,” he will kick you! He will become your enemy. But if you can find a donkey who simply tries to understand the fact of his stupidity, that’s enough proof that the change has started happening.
And secondly, you did not rightly understand the meaning of the story. The person who had come to the Sufi master was not a disciple. He was just curious. He had come accidentally. Just because he was going to all kinds of people – to all masters, learned people, schools – he had come to this master too. It was just part of his accidental life. He was not there to seek and to search. He was not there to be in the company of the master, he was not ready to dissolve into the master. He was not surrendered either.
Listen to the story again:
A man who had spent many years trying to puzzle out meanings went to see a Sufi and told him about his search.
He must have bragged about his search. He had come to be recognized by the master: “Yes, you are a great seeker; you have already done so much.” He had come to be certified. He had not come as a seeker, he had not come to become part of the family of the master – because unless somebody becomes part of the family of the master, falls in tune with the master, nothing can be done for him. He was an outsider, just a visitor, was bragging about his search, which was utterly meaningless because he was simply trying to think about puzzles.
That’s what philosophy is: it is nothing but trying to puzzle out meanings. It is like a blind man thinking about light.
You must have heard the ancient Indian parable that five blind men went to see an elephant. They touched the elephant from all sides. Somebody touched his legs and thought that the elephant is like a pillar, obviously, and so on, so forth, and they all started quarreling. Everybody was proposing a philosophy about the elephant and nobody had seen the elephant. They were all blind, but a part of the elephant had been touched by each. But the part is not the whole, and if you start calling the part the whole, you are falling into one of the greatest lies possible. It is the greatest lie because it contains a little portion of truth in it. It is a half-truth, a partial truth, and a partial truth is more dangerous than a total lie because it can deceive people. You can be deceived through it, and you can deceive others because it contains a little ingredient of truth.
They all started fighting and quarreling. That’s what philosophers have been doing: this is a story about philosophers.
Each philosopher has touched a part – because the totality is not conceivable through the intellect. The totality is conceivable only when you dissolve your ego, your intellect, your heart, everything into it, when you disappear into the ocean like a dewdrop falling into the ocean. Then you know the whole of it, then you see, then you experience. Otherwise, everybody comes to touch a small portion of this infinite universe and then he starts claiming, “This is the truth.” That’s how systems of philosophy arise.
The man must have been a philosopher. He was trying out, figuring out what this reality is, who has created it, why he has created it, what is the purpose of existence, what is the goal, what is the source. And those are all puzzles, and insoluble puzzles: they cannot be solved. Only stupid people become interested in them, but these stupid people think they are religious. Seeing the man’s utter stupidity, the master gave him another puzzle – because that’s what he was interested in.
I will not give you IHMN unless I see that a donkey has arrived. Donkeys keep far away from me, they know that they will be exposed here. They never come close to me. It needs courage to come close to me because the closer you come, the more you will be exposed. The closer you come, the more naked you will be standing under the sun. The closer you come, the more your image about yourself will be shattered into pieces. The closer you come, the more you will see that whatever you have been doing up to now has been utterly absurd.
It needs guts to come close to me. It always needs guts to come close to a master.
The man had come just out of curiosity: maybe he could get another puzzle. His interest was not truth, his interest was puzzles. He wanted a puzzle so he could take the challenge and start working out a way to solve it. He was not interested in truth.
Truth is not a puzzle at all. Let me repeat it: truth is not a puzzle. Truth is not a problem, not at all. Truth is very simple, utterly simple. And truth is not a problem, but a mystery – just as love is a mystery, not a problem. You cannot solve it through logic, mathematics. You can move into love, you can be madly in love, you can have the taste of it, it can transform you. It is not a problem to be solved but a mystery to be lived.
Truth is this mystery that surrounds you, in the form of people, in the form of trees, animals, birds, stars. This whole mystery is the truth. There is nothing problematic about it. It is already here. You are in it, how can you solve it? You are it, who is there to solve it? There is nobody except the mystery. How can a small ripple in the ocean solve the mystery of the ocean? It itself is part of the mystery. So are you.
The religious person is one who has seen the fact that existence is not problematic; it is mysterious, it is miraculous. Dive deep into it. Celebrate it. Make a festival out of it. Sing, dance, love, pray, paint, create music – but don’t try to solve it.
The musician is much closer than the philosopher; so is the poet much closer than the philosopher; so is the dancer even closer than the musician and the poet. Why is the dancer so much closer? Because in the dance you dissolve; the dancer disappears and only the dance remains. Dance is one of the deepest meditations possible.
In India we have conceived of God as a dancer, Nataraj. That is very significant – because when a painter paints, immediately he becomes separate from the painting. If the painting remains in his being, he is one with it. When it is yet hidden, just a seed, just a thought, a dream, the painter is one with his painting. The moment he has painted it, poured it on the canvas, he has become separate from it. Duality has arisen. So is the case with the poet, so is the case with the musician.
Only the dancer has something unique: the dancer remains one with the dance. Even when he starts dancing, the unity is not broken, there is no duality: utter oneness. In fact, when the dancer is thinking about the dance there is a duality – the idea of the dance and the dancer – there is a subtle duality. The moment he starts dancing even that duality disappears. Then the dancer is the dance. There is no dancer separate from the dance, no dance separate from the dancer. This is unio mystica.
God is a dancer. That means he has not painted the world, otherwise he would have become separate from it. It is not his poetry, it is not his music. It is his dance. He is in it, he is it, right this very moment: these green trees, and the sun pouring its gold through them, and the call of the bird, and you here sitting in silence, just being with me for no particular reason, just enjoying this moment, this silence. This is it.
The man who had come to the Sufi master was very knowledgeable, a thinker; he was not a disciple. Had he been a disciple, the master would have never given him IHMN – because it is utter nonsense. He gave this to the man just to see how he would react, and the man was very happy, grateful, that now he had a great Sufi puzzle; he would go and meditate. It was his ego that was satisfied. He was gratified. It was not out of trust that he didn’t ask a question, it was because of the ego that he didn’t ask a question. How could such a great philosopher ask a question? He would work it out himself, he would go home and ponder over it.
You say to me, “If you had given me IHMN to meditate over, I would have silently accepted it out of trust…” He had not accepted it out of trust. If he had known even a little bit of trust, if the master had seen even a little trust in his being, this puzzle would not have been given to him. There was no trust. The man must have been a doubter because thinkers live through doubt. They live in doubt, doubt is their very medium of functioning.
A student comes to the master with all kinds of doubts. That is the difference between a student and a disciple. When the disciple comes, he comes in complete trust.
The Sufi said, “Go away and ponder this – IHMN.”
The man went away.
Not because he trusted, not because he was a devotee, not because he was in a love relationship with the master, but just because he said, “Okay, so I will bring the answer. Just give me a little chance. I have all the capacities and the intelligence and the talent, and I have worked out many puzzles before. Soon I will be here with the answer.”
When he came back, the Sufi was dead.
“Now I shall never know the truth!” moaned the puzzler.
But he could not get anything out of those four puzzling letters, IHMN – because there was nothing to get out of them.
At that moment the Sufi’s chief disciple appeared.
“If,” he said, “you are worrying about the secret meaning of IHMN, I will tell you. It is the initials of the Persian phrase ‘In Huruf Maani Nadarad’ – which means, ‘These letters have no meaning.’”
“But why should I have been given such a task?” cried the puzzling man.
“Because, when a donkey comes to you, you give him cabbages. That is his nutrition, no matter what he calls it. Donkeys probably think that they are doing something far more significant than eating cabbages.”
The master had given such an absurd thing to meditate over because the man wanted a challenge to his ego. He was not interested in truth. He was interested in a great puzzle so he could fight with the puzzle, find out a solution to the puzzle, and feel good – “I have got the intelligence, I have got such power, I am no ordinary man; I am a great philosopher” – although he was only a donkey, and only cabbages were given to him.
You say, “If you had given me IHMN to meditate over, I would have silently accepted it out of trust…” First, I would not give such a thing to any of my disciples. But sometimes I give a few puzzles to people because they are not disciples, even if they think they are. If they are not disciples, or only pretending to be disciples, I give them a few puzzles. If they can accept those puzzles out of trust, that very phenomenon immediately makes them disciples.
There is a subtle point to be understood. If the master had seen that the man had accepted out of trust, if the man had bowed down and touched the feet of the master… If the master had seen in some way that he had accepted out of trust he would have said, “Wait, let me change it. You don’t need a cabbage, you are not a donkey.”
Trust is the greatest intelligence. Why don’t people trust? – because they don’t trust their intelligence. They are afraid, they are afraid they may be cheated. They are afraid, that’s why they doubt. Doubt is out of fear. Doubt is out of a kind of insecurity in your own intelligence. You are not confident that you can trust and you can go into trust. Trust needs great intelligence, courage, integrity. It needs a great heart to go into it. If you don’t have enough intelligence, you protect yourself through doubt. It is doubt that shows you have a very mediocre mind, although mediocre minds, people who doubt too much, think they have great skeptical minds.
It doesn’t matter what donkeys think: cabbages are cabbages. It is their nutrition, although they think they are doing something great, something very significant. Maybe they are waiting for the whole existence to be grateful to them because they are transforming cabbages into great energy! The man who doubts thinks he has great intelligence. That’s why he doubts, that’s why he is skeptical, that’s why he is atheistic and all that. That is not true.
If you have intelligence you are ready to go into the unknown because you know that even if the whole known world disappears and you are left in the unknown, you will be able to settle there, you will be able to make a home there in the unknown. You trust your intelligence. Doubt is on guard. Intelligence keeps itself open because intelligence knows, “Whatever happens, I will be able to take the challenge, to respond adequately.” The mediocre mind does not have that trust in itself.
What I am saying is, you can trust a master only if you trust yourself. If you can’t trust yourself, how can you trust a master? If you can’t trust yourself, how can you trust your trust in a master? It is impossible.
If the Sufi had seen even just a little ray of trust in the man, he would have immediately taken the puzzle back. He himself would have said, “This means nothing. You don’t need a cabbage, you are not a donkey. You are not merely a knowledgeable man, you are a real seeker. Now, rather than giving you a puzzle, I will give you a taste of the mystery that I am, and the whole existence is, and you are too – but you are fast asleep. Let me awaken you.” Then the whole thing would have been different.
I cannot give it to you because you have trust. Have you watched one thing? It is very difficult to deceive a small child. Even very cunning people find it very difficult. If a small child is carrying a note of a hundred rupees, nobody will be able to cheat the child. It will be very difficult to cheat the child. Why? – because of the trust, the innocence, the very innocence. And if you take the note from the child you will never be able to forgive yourself. That memory will haunt you forever and ever, it will create hell for you.
Have you watched some strange things like this? You are sitting on a railway platform and you tell a stranger who is sitting by your side, “Please, just take a little care of my luggage; I am going to purchase a ticket.” You don’t know the man, he is an absolute stranger, you have never seen him before. You are leaving your suitcases, all your money, all your things in the hands of an unknown stranger. Who knows, he may escape with the whole thing, but it never happens. Why does it never happen? – because of trust. How can that man deceive you? You trusted him, an unknown stranger. There was no need to trust him. You didn’t have any proof of his honesty, of his character, you knew nothing about him – but it never happens.
If you are watching your luggage, he may steal something – that is possible – but if you leave your luggage to him and go to purchase a ticket, it is impossible. What makes it impossible? Trust has its own power. Trust has its own energy, its own vibe. The very gesture that you trusted him makes it impossible, he cannot deceive you.
That means, when people deceive you, it is not only their fault. You are also at fault. You must be carrying mistrust in you – they got the vibe. If trust prevents them from deceiving you, then your mistrust about people must be creating an atmosphere in which deceiving becomes easier for them.
I would not have given it to you. I have seen the light of trust in your eyes. And even if I had given it to you, out of trust it would have changed its total quality. Then it would not have been just a puzzle, it would have become a koan. If you had accepted not out of the ego but out of trust, it would have become a great meditation. And if you had accepted out of trust and love, just repeating this sound, meaningless sound, would have led you into some deeper realms of your being.
It is said…

An ancient Indian story: there was a dacoit, a robber. He was looting all kinds of people. One day he came across the mystic Narada. Narada was singing on his one-stringed guitar, utterly lost in ecstasy, passing through a jungle, and the robber caught hold of him. Narada continued playing on his one-stringed guitar.
The robber’s name was Vallya. Later on he became a great seer, Valmiki. He was the first man to write the story of Rama.
Vallya could not believe his eyes – because he had seen two types of people up to then, up to that moment. One was the type who would start trembling, seeing this strong man. He was a very strong man, and very dangerous and murderous. Just seeing him there, the other would start trembling and collapse, would give all that he had, voluntarily, to him. He had seen that kind: the coward, the fearful. The other kind was the brave, who would start fighting back. Either the person would start running, or the person would start fighting. Fight or flight – those had been his two experiences with people up to then.
But Narada did nothing. He was a third type. For the first time Vallya had come across the third type. He continued playing on his musical instrument with the same joy and the same ecstasy. Even Vallya started feeling the joy, the vibe. Narada was dancing and Vallya also started dancing. And Vallya said, “This is strange. What are you doing to me? I am a robber and a murderer. I can kill you. You should not trust me.”
But there was nobody to listen to him. The song continued, the music continued, that celestial vibe continued. Then, when Narada was finished with his music he asked Vallya, “What do you want?”
By that time a great change had happened. Vallya said, “I would like to be as ecstatic as you are. Can you help me? I don’t want anything else. You are the first man who is really rich. I have come across only beggars up to now – rich beggars, poor beggars, but all beggars. You are the first man who is really rich, and you have such a richness that I cannot steal it. It is your inner richness. Can I also have glimpses like this? Is it possible for a murderer like me, a robber like me, a sinner like me? What should I do?”
Narada said, “Do one thing: start chanting the name of Rama.”
Then Narada went, and Vallya really got into it. He was a man of will, very strong. He chanted day in, day out.
When you chant “Rama, Rama, Rama, Rama” continuously, when there is not much gap between “Rama” and “Rama,” slowly, slowly you will start hearing “Mara, Mara, Mara.” If you chant “Rama, Rama, Rama” continuously, the gestalt will change. The m of the Ram will become joined with the ra of another Ram that is following. Then it becomes “Mara, Mara.” Ram means God, Ram means the immortal element, the eternal element; mara means death.
Vallya was a very uneducated man, had never been in any kind of religious education. He forgot all about Ram. Slowly, slowly he chanted only “Mara, Mara, Mara.”
Months passed. Narada came back; he was surprised. Vallya was chanting “Mara, Mara, Mara” – his whole body was chanting “Mara, Mara, Mara.” Narada could feel the change that had happened to that jungle from miles away. It had a different atmosphere. When he came closer and heard “Mara, Mara,” he was surprised because the man has been chanting in a completely wrong way.
He came closer and saw Vallya. The man was totally transformed. He was luminous; the ecstasy had happened. It happened even by chanting the wrong mantra. Narada kept quiet; he didn’t say anything to him. There was no need, no point in disturbing the poor man. He had arrived.

There is a Sufi saying that even a wrong means becomes right in the right person’s hand – and vice versa, even a right means becomes wrong in a wrong man’s hand. And it is so. The ultimate result depends on your heart, not on the means used. When a master is alive, he can use any means, and they all become transforming forces. When the master is gone, all those means slowly, slowly lose their grace. Then people go on doing them for centuries, but nothing happens. Right means in wrong hands are wrong; wrong means in right hands are right.
If you had trusted, then even this meaningless sound, IHMN, would have become a great meditation to you.
And the last thing. You ask, “Can you please explain the right attitude of a disciple receiving instruction from the master?” Only no attitude is the right attitude from the side of the disciple. If you have a certain attitude, that means you are not totally open. You are open only in a certain way, in a limited way. You have your certain conditions. No, the disciple has no conditions, the disciple’s surrender is unconditional. He is just open – no attitude. Because attitude means your mind is still functioning. You are carrying a certain attitude. You are saying, “If you say this, I will follow. If you say something else, I am not going to follow. I will go only up to that limit; beyond that I am not coming with you.”
You are keeping a suspicious eye. You are judging the master from the corner of your eye, whether he is giving you the right thing – as if you know what is right. Whether he is the right master – as if you can judge who is the right master and who is not. How can you judge? You have never known light. How can you judge the eyes which have seen light?
The only approach, right approach, toward a master is to have no attitude. That’s the meaning of surrender: just being open, vulnerable. The disciple has to disappear, only then is he a disciple. If the disciple is still there, then he is only a student, not a disciple; then he has come to gather a few more bits of knowledge.
Then he will accumulate a little more knowledge and will go home – a few more feathers for his ego, a few more decorations. But he is decorating his prison cell. He can decorate it with precious stones, with diamonds, but then too it is a prison cell.
The master is there to help you to come out of your prison, come out of your ego, come out of the shell that you have become enclosed in. You can’t have any attitude toward the master. Love knows no attitude, love knows no conditions. Love is unconditional. Only then is the master allowed in, with no strings attached. Only then can the master pour into your being. And that very pouring is a transformation.

The second question:
Osho,
Is it not possible at all that the great religious scriptures of the world can help the seeker in his search for God?
The real seeker cannot search for God because to start a search for God means he has already accepted that God is. He has already concluded. How can one start a search from a conclusion? He is already prejudiced. He is a believer, not a seeker. The seeker cannot search for God because he does not know. He can only search into existence, not for God. He can inquire into the reality that surrounds him, not for God.
Yes, when you go deep into reality you will find God. God cannot be the beginning of your search; it is the end, the climax, the culmination. God is the discovery. How can you begin with God?
Once a psychologist and a professor of Jaipur University came to see me. He said, “I am a man of science and I have decided to prove through scientific methods and inquiry, the reality, the truth of reincarnation.”
I asked him, “Do you know what scientific inquiry means? Scientific inquiry means that you have not decided anything at all in the beginning. The inquiry is open. You say, ‘I am a man of science.’ You are not. And you say, ‘I have decided to prove through scientific methods the existence, the reality, the truth of reincarnation.’ If you have not already proved it, how can you accept it? And if you have proved it already, then what are you going to prove, what is the point of your inquiry? Either you know the truth of reincarnation, then there is no need to inquire; or you don’t know the truth of reincarnation, then how can you decide from the very beginning that you are going to prove it? This is a prejudiced inquiry, this is not inquiry.”
Inquiry means you move without any conclusion. Maybe it is true, maybe it is not; maybe something else is true. You simply keep your doors open. Whatever the truth, you allow the truth to have its say.
I told the professor, “You are just a Hindu, already prejudiced, believing in reincarnation. Just as Christians don’t believe in it, you believe in it. A Christian also starts a “scientific inquiry” to prove that there is no reincarnation. Will it be scientific? It will only be a Christian inquiry, an effort to use science to prove your prejudices. Your inquiry will be a Hindu inquiry, not a scientific inquiry.”
A scientist cannot be a Hindu or a Christian or a Mohammedan; a scientist has simply to be a scientist. He can only inquire. Inquiry means you have not arrived at any conclusions, no a priori conclusion. That is the fundamental of all inquiry.
You cannot inquire and search for God. You can only inquire into the reality that is already available: these trees, these rocks, these rivers, these people – you. You have to go into it. No scripture is going to help you because all scriptures will make you prejudiced, and all scriptures will only be borrowed. You will become a donkey.
I have heard…

The new clergyman was coming to call, and the mother gave Emma some instructions: “If he asks your name, say Emma Jane. If he asks how old you are, say you are eight years old. If he asks who made you, say ‘God made me.’”
The clergyman arrived in due time, and putting down his hat and Bible, approached little Emma, and patting her head, asked: “What is your name, little girl?”
“Emma Jane.”
“And how old are you, Emma Jane?”
“Eight years old,” replied Jane.
“Well, well, well! Isn’t that fine! Do you know who made you, Emma Jane?”
The little girl hesitated for several moments and then she replied, “Mamma did tell me the man’s name, but I’ve gone and forgotten it.”

Borrowed, learned from others, from scriptures, from traditions, your knowledge is never going to become your knowing. It will make you only more and more ridiculous. This is not the way of a seeker.
The seeker has to begin in absolute openness, with no conclusion this way or that. The seeker has to begin without any belief or disbelief. The seeker has to begin with great trust in his intelligence, that is true – trust in intelligence but not in any conceptions.
Your scriptures can only be in your mouth, they cannot reach your heart.

Some wasps built their nests during the week in a Scottish clergyman’s best breeches. On the Sabbath, as he warmed up to his preaching, the wasps too warmed up, with the result that presently the minister was leaping about like a jack-in-the-box and slapping his lower anatomy with great vigor, to the amazement of the congregation.
“Be calm, brethren,” he shouted. “The word of God is in my mouth, but the Devil is in my breeches!”

Just learning words, theories, systems of thought is not going to help you at all. Deep down you will remain the same. Deep down no change has ever happened through knowledge. At the most you can cultivate a beautiful personality, a beautiful outside. Jesus has condemned such people as “whited sepulchers” – just whitewashed from the outside.
Deep inside, how can words change you? Yes, you can cultivate decorum, you can cultivate a certain character, but the character remains superficial. It is never your consciousness. And only consciousness matters, only what you can see on your own is decisive. All else will make you a donkey, and all the scriptures will prove nothing but cabbages.
You ask, “Is it not possible at all that the great religious scriptures of the world can help the seeker in his search for God?” Buddha has said again and again: “Ihi passiko” – come and see.” Don’t believe because the Vedas say so, don’t believe because the ancient masters say so, don’t believe because the traditions say so – and don’t believe even because I say so. Come and see – ihi passiko. Come and experiment. But how can you experiment with scriptures? You can experiment only with a living master.
Religion lives only while there is a living master. Once the master is gone, you have scriptures, words, memories, nostalgia, but the spirit has left. You only have the cage, the bird has flown.
That’s how all the traditions have been created. When Jesus was there, there was life in what he was saying. Those words had fire. His passion was in his words, his heart was beating in his words. Those words were hot. Now turn the pages of the Bible; those words are just ashes, just utterly cold. There is nothing left. You will have to again find a living master.
And the problem is, when Jesus is alive nobody listens to him. He is condemned from every corner. When he dies everybody worships him. The same people who had been condemning him become his worshippers. They start feeling guilty. To put their guilt right they start worshipping; worship comes out of guilt.
The same people who condemned Buddha become Buddhists and go on praising him for centuries. But when Buddha is alive he is condemned; only very rare courageous people follow him. The general masses are always against a living truth. They are too engrossed in their lies, they are too involved with their futile life, they are too ignorant to see the light or even to raise their eyes, and they become angry easily.
The presence of a Buddha or a Christ creates much anger in the masses. But when the Buddha or the Jesus is gone, the same masses start feeling guilty that they didn’t behave rightly with the man. Now things have to be put right: they start worshipping. But worship is not religion. Worship is a way of avoiding religion, and worship brings no transformation, so there is no risk. You can be a Christian or a Hindu or a Mohammedan; there is no risk.
The risk was there when Mohammed was alive. It was dangerous to be with that man, it was a question of life and death; but now to be a Mohammedan is perfectly convenient, comfortable. And if you live amid Mohammedans it is dangerous not to be a Mohammedan. It is better to be a Mohammedan, it makes your life easier. To be a Mohammedan becomes a kind of lubricant. And so is the case with the Hindus and the Christians and the Jainas and the Buddhists. These have become social conveniences.
You will have to come out and search for a place where the fire is still alive, where God is still alive, where a Bible is still in the process of being born, where a Gita is being expressed. Soon those words will become scriptures.
Scriptures are the footprints of the buddhas – but the buddhas are gone and you are worshipping the footprints on the sands of time. It is utterly meaningless, stupid. Those footprints are not the feet of Buddha. If you had surrendered to the feet of Buddha, you would have been transported into another world. From time to eternity you would have been transported, from the finite to infinity you would have been transported, from death to deathlessness you would have been transported if you had surrendered to the alive feet of Buddha.
But Buddha is gone. On the sands of time his footprints are left. You are putting flowers and bowing down to the footprints, but footprints cannot help.
That’s what your scriptures are all about, footprints of beautiful people, but the worship of the footprints is just meaningless. You cannot get anything out of the footprints.
If you really want to know the truth of existence, you will have to be in the company of someone who has known. Seek a man who has eyes, seek a man who has love, seek a man in whose heart there is the flame of prayer. Then there is a possibility the flame may jump into your heart. You may become aflame.
Come closer to a master. There comes a moment when you are so close, in deep intimacy, that the flame from one lit candle jumps into another unlit candle. Then the disciple becomes the master himself. That’s the only way to seek and search, all other ways are just to avoid, to pretend.

The third question:
Osho,
I would very much like to take sannyas but it will be totally ruinous for my career as orange clothes will not be accepted at my place of work. Is there any alternative to this?
Remember only one thing: if you really want to do something, do it. If you don’t want to do it, don’t do it, but be clear. Don’t be a hotchpotch, don’t be a mess.
When you really want to be a painter, become a painter, whatever the risk. Yes, you will not be able to become a prime minister by becoming a painter. You will not be very respectable in the society because your paintings are not useful to the society in any way. They are not utilitarian. And the greater they are, the less utilitarian they will be. The more original they are, the less they will be understood and sold. But if you want to be a painter, be a painter – even if that means to remain poor, even if that means to remain starved, even if that means you will be dying earlier.
Suffer if it means suffering – because even in that suffering you will have a subtle joy that you are doing the thing you wanted to do. You will have a tremendous contentment. Comforts you may not have, convenience you may not have, but contentment you will have, and that is the real value.
But if you think of other things, if you are considering every other thing, it is better to be a politician than to be a painter. You will become rich, you will be powerful, you will be well-known, you will be respected. Your family will be proud of you; your parents will be proud of you; your wife, your children, all will be proud of you. Everybody’s ego will be fulfilled. Your neighbors will be proud. Everybody will think that you are a precious gem, but you will be discontented.
I have heard…

A great surgeon was retiring. He had served almost fifty years. He was now seventy-five, still perfect in his surgery. All his friends, his patients, his well-wishers, his students had gathered to celebrate the occasion. Many speeches were delivered in praise of him, he was praised like anything. He was almost a demigod in his world, in the world of surgeons.
But he was sitting there looking very sad, and when finally one of his famous colleagues was praising him – saying that he was the greatest surgeon that happened down the ages, and it would take many centuries again to get such a perfect hand, such an artistic hand – the old surgeon started crying. Tears came to his eyes.
People were worried about what had happened. They asked, “Why do you look so sad and why are tears in your eyes? You should be perfectly happy. What more can one expect in life? You are one of the most successful men.”
He said, “That I know, but I know something else too. I am the most frustrated too because I wanted to become a dancer and not a surgeon. Now I have succeeded in something which I never wanted to become. My whole life has been a waste. Even if I had become only a dancer unknown to the world, I would have been utterly contented. I would have done my thing.”

Remember, if you want to become a sannyasin, become one. There will be problems, there are bound to be problems. It is not cheap. You will have to pay the price for it. Yes, you are right, it may ruin your career, but who bothers about a career except stupid people? A career? What does that mean? That you will live safe and you will die safe? That you will live with much money and you will die a rich man? But what about your inner contentment? If your soul remains crippled and paralyzed, what is the point of gaining the whole world?
The real thing is to have the joy, the joy of life, that you lived courageously in your own way, and whatever was asked as a price, you paid it. Whenever you attain something through paying for it, it is more valuable. If you can get it cheap, it loses all value.
Sannyas is costly, particularly my sannyas. If you become a traditional sannyasin, there will be no problem.

Just a few days ago a Jaina woman came and started crying. I asked, “What is the matter?”
She said, “My husband has become your sannyasin. If he really wanted to become a sannyasin he should have become a Jaina sannyasin. Then at least he would be respectable. Becoming your sannyasin is dangerous. Now people have started thinking that he has gone crazy. Even his own children are suspicious. I myself think that something has gone wrong with him.”
Now, she is ready if he becomes a Jaina sannyasin, although by becoming a Jaina sannyasin he would have to leave the house, the family.
The wife is ready. She told me, “I am ready. If he has to leave the home and the children and me, we will manage. It will be difficult, but we will manage. By becoming your sannyasin he is not leaving the house: that is the problem. Now the neighbors are asking, ‘What kind of sannyasin is he? Still living with the family, still living with the wife and the children, still going to work? What kind of sannyasin is he?’
“I am being tortured,” she said, “continuously ridiculed. I am ready if he leaves the home. It’s okay, we would manage. It would be difficult, it would be financially difficult, but we would manage. We would be poor, but that’s okay. At least we could keep our heads high, proud.”

You see, if you become a traditional sannyasin your parents may not be so angry. In fact they may enjoy it. People will say, “Look, your son has become a great sannyasin. You are fortunate; the tree is known by the fruit. Look, your son… Such a great sannyasin. He has renounced the world.” And your father will feel proud, your mother will feel proud. Even your wife – who will be suffering very much because you have left her – will feel proud that she is the wife of somebody who has renounced the world, a traditional value. And everybody will be thinking highly of you and your family.
If you become my sannyasin you are crazy, you are mad: “You have fallen in this man’s trap, and he is just hypnotizing people and doing nothing. You are a victim.” Everybody will advise you, “Why don’t you go to the psychiatrist and take some help? Why don’t you go to the mountains and rest a little?”
Yes, Ghurye, you are right, it may ruin your career. It is dangerous. In the days of Mahavira it was dangerous to become a Jaina sannyasin. Just wait two thousand years, then my sannyasins will be respected. It will help their career. By that time everything will be dead; whatever I am saying will have lost all fire, all rebellion, things will have become formal. Ghurye, you will have to wait at least two thousand years. Then you can become my sannyasin without ruining your career, and your wife will be happy, and your children and your parents, and everybody will be happy – but you will have to wait for two thousand years.
If you want to become a sannyasin right now, there are going to be problems. But a real man is born out of facing problems and challenges.
Never decide for a career. Think of consciousness because that is the only richness. And think of the inner journey. Always be authentic to yourself. For no other consideration should you compromise. A compromising person has no soul. The more you compromise, the less soul you have. By and by you are just nothing, just apparently alive, but deep down, dead. Beware of that.
Ghurye has been asking many questions. I had not answered him yet. This is the first question I am answering. And I am answering this question to provoke a respect for his own soul in him. Nothing else is more important. If you cannot respect your own longing, you are disrespectful to God. If you cannot assert yourself in the way you want to be, you are a coward, you are compromising. Then you will never be centered, you will never have an integrated being, you will never find yourself crystallized. You will always remain a hazy, cloudy thing.
The soul is born through such sacrifices. I am not saying that there will be no problem. There will be problems – many more than you can think of right now, many more than you can even imagine. Friends will turn into enemies, your own family will start looking at you as if you have fallen from grace, and certainly, wherever you work, your colleagues will start putting you out of their circle, as if you have become an outsider, a foreigner.
But all these problems are worth facing. These are the steps of the temple of God. This is real sacrifice, austerity. And slowly, slowly when one passes through such fire, the gold that you are carrying within you becomes pure – and only through the purity of your inner gold, one day, the golden flower blooms.
I am all for individual freedom, and freedom is the door to God. What do I mean by freedom? To live fearlessly is freedom, to drop fear is freedom. Fear creates our chains.
Now you are afraid of your job, career, family, neighborhood. These are all chains made of your fear. Drop these chains. Live in freedom. Live authentically the life you really want to live. Don’t try to be somebody else, just be yourself.

A great Hasidic mystic, Josiah, was dying and somebody asked him, “Master, why don’t you pray now to Moses because you are now on your deathbed? Pray to Moses. He will help you in the other world.”
Josiah opened his eyes and said, “Stop all this nonsense! God is not going to ask me, ‘Josiah, why were you not Moses?’ He will ask me, ‘Josiah, why were you not Josiah?’ Moses has nothing to do with this. I will have to answer for myself, why I was not myself, why I betrayed my innermost being. That’s the question!”

Freedom means don’t betray yourself, whatever the cost. Remain true to yourself, and you will be true to God.
A parable…

In the land of the moths, there is the legend of the Old One. It says that one night, when a very young moth was flying about with his friends, he happened to look up and saw a wondrous white light hanging between the branches of a tree. It was in fact the moon, but as all moths are so preoccupied with candles, street lamps, and other lights that they are constantly circling, our hero and his friends had never seen it before.
With this sight came a sudden and firm resolution: our moth would never again settle for flying around anything else but the moon. And so every night, when the moths would venture out from their resting places and each head for a suitable light, our moth headed upward toward the heavens.
But the moon, although it always seemed so near, remained always beyond his finite capacity for flight. He never, however, allowed his frustrations to overcome him, and in fact his efforts, though unsuccessful in making him into a lunar astronaut, yielded him an unexpected dividend.
For while his friends and family, his neighbors and co-citizens of moth land all reviled and ridiculed him, they all preceded him to the grave in the fiery incinerating death of their kind, burned to a crisp in one of those accessible flames they had set as their goal.
The Old One died peacefully at a very ripe age, beneath the cool white shine of his beloved.

Sannyas means you have become interested in the moon. Sannyas means you have become interested in attaining the impossible. Sannyas means now you are entering a journey for the unknown shore. It is dangerous, but through this danger one is reborn. Through this impossible longing – passion for the impossible – something integrates in you.
Other moths are bound to be angry with you. They will ridicule you because you are insulting them. They feel the insult because they are only living around candles and street lights, and they think that is the only goal worth achieving in life – to go round and round around a candle and then die.
The people who are living for money and power and prestige are going round and round around street lamps. They will naturally be offended by you when you raise your heads toward the moon. They will ridicule you, they will call you mad. They will say, “Nobody has ever attained it. Don’t be foolish. Be normal. Come, how beautiful is this candle and this street light!”
Sannyas means love for the moon. That very love transforms. It is not a question of whether you reach the moon or not. That very love transmutes, that very love becomes the alchemy. You are no longer part of the ordinary world, you start living in an extraordinary world. Poetry is born in you, the music of the unknown is heard, a dance starts happening. That’s what God is all about. Sannyas is an invitation for God to become a guest in your being. Sannyas is readiness to be a host for God.

The last question:
Osho,
Why is the West becoming more and more interested in meditation? And also, why is the East losing interest in its own spiritual treasures?
A lawyer made his way to the edge of the excavation where a gang was working, and called the name of Timothy O’Toole.
“Who is wanting me?” inquired a heavy voice.
“Mr. O’Toole,” the lawyer asked, “did you come from Castlebar, County Mayo?”
“I did that.”
“And your mother was named Bridget and your father Michael?”
“They was.”
“It is my duty then,” said the lawyer, “to inform you, Mr. O’Toole, that your Aunt Mary has died in Iowa, leaving you an estate of 60,000 dollars.”
There was a short silence below and then a lively commotion.
“Are you coming, Mr. O’Toole?” the lawyer called down.
“In one minute,” was bellowed in answer. “I have just stopped to lick the foreman.”
It required just six months of extremely riotous living for O’Toole to expend all of the 60,000 dollars. His chief endeavor was to satisfy a huge inherited thirst. Then he went back to his job. And there, presently the lawyer sought him out again.
“It is your Uncle Patrick this time, Mr. O’Toole,” the lawyer explained. “He has died in Texas and left you 40,000 dollars.”
O’Toole leaned heavily on his pick and shook his head in great weariness. “I don’t think I can take it,” he declared. “I am not as strong as I once was, and I misdoubt me that I could go through all that money and live.”

That’s what has happened in the West. Man in the West has succeeded in attaining all the affluence that the whole of humanity has been longing for down the ages. The West has succeeded materially in becoming rich and now it is too weary, too tired. The journey has taken all its soul. The journey has finished the Western man. Outwardly all is available, but the contact with the inner is lost. Now everything that man needs is there, but the man is no longer there. Possessions are there, but the master has disappeared. A great imbalance has happened. Richness is there, but man is not feeling rich at all. He is feeling, on the contrary, very impoverished, very poor.
Think of this paradox: when you are outwardly rich, only then do you become aware of your inner poverty, in contrast. When you are outwardly poor, you never become aware of your inner poverty because there is no contrast. You write with white chalk on blackboards, not on white boards. Why? – because only on blackboards will it show. The contrast is needed.
When you are outwardly rich, suddenly a great awareness happens: “Inwardly I am poor, a beggar.” And now a hopelessness also comes as a shadow: “All is attained that we had thought – all imagination and fantasies fulfilled – and nothing has happened out of it, no contentment, no bliss.” The West is bewildered. Out of this bewilderment a great desire is arising: how to have contact with one’s self again.
Meditation is nothing but again putting your roots into your inner world, into your interiority. Hence the West is becoming very interested in meditation and very interested in the Eastern treasures.
The East was also interested in meditation when the East was rich; this has to be understood. That’s why I am not against richness and I don’t think that poverty has any spirituality in it. I am utterly against poverty because whenever a country becomes poor, it loses contact with all meditation, all spiritual efforts. Whenever a country becomes poor outwardly, it becomes unaware of the inner poverty.
That’s why you can see a kind of contentment on Indian faces that is not found in the West. It is not real contentment; it is just unawareness of the inner poverty. Indians think, “Look at the anxiety, anguish, and tension on the Western faces. Although we are poor, we are inwardly very content.” That is utter nonsense, they are not contented. I have been watching thousands of people, they are not contented. But one thing is certainly there, they are not aware of the discontent – because to be aware of the discontent, outer richness is needed. Without outer richness nobody becomes aware of the inner discontent. And there are enough proofs of it.
All the avatars of the Hindus were kings or sons of kings, kings or princes. All the Jaina tirthankaras, all the Jaina prophets, were kings, and so was Buddha. All the three great traditions of India give ample proof.
Why did Buddha become discontented, why did he start a search for meditation? Because he was rich. He lived in affluence; he lived with all that was possible, all the comforts, all the material gadgets. Suddenly he became aware. And he was not very old when he became aware, he was only twenty-nine when he became aware that there was a dark hole inside.
Light is outside, hence it shows your inner darkness. Just a little dirt on a white shirt and it shows. That’s what happened.
He escaped from the palace. That’s what happened to Mahavira, he also escaped from a palace. It was not happening to a beggar. There were beggars also in Buddha’s time. In fact, the story is that Buddha renounced the world when he saw a beggar for the first time, and an old man, and a dead body, and a sannyasin. Beggars were there.
Buddha was going to participate in a youth festival, he was to inaugurate it. From his golden chariot, he saw a beggar for the first time – because his father had managed his whole life that Buddha should never see a beggar, or an ill man, or an old man, or a dead man. Astrologers had told the father when Buddha was born that if he ever saw those things he would immediately renounce the world, so not to allow him to see them. So wherever Buddha would move, beggars would be removed, old people would be removed or forced to remain in their houses, not come out. Even in Buddha’s garden, no dead leaf was allowed. Every dead leaf was removed during the night so in the morning when Buddha would come there he could only see youth, young leaves, young flowers. He had never seen a flower withering.
When he saw a beggar for the first time… And the parable is beautiful, it says the gods became worried: “The father is succeeding too much. Twenty-nine years have passed, and Buddha has the capacity to become one of the most awakened persons in the world.” The gods became worried: “The management of the father is such that he may never come across a beggar or an old man. He may miss.” So they pretended – one god walked like a beggar, another like an old man, another became like a dead man, another like a sannyasin.
There were beggars, but they didn’t renounce anything. They had nothing to renounce, they were contented. Buddha became discontented.
When this country was rich, many more people were interested in meditation; in fact, all of the people were interested in meditation. Sooner or later they would start thinking of the moon, of the beyond, of the inner. Now the country is poor, so poor that there is no contrast of the inner and the outer. The inner is poor, the outer is poor. The inner and the outer are in perfect harmony, both are poor. That’s why you see a kind of contentment on Indian faces that is not true contentment. And because of this, people have become accustomed to thinking that poverty has something spiritual in it.
Poverty is worshipped in India. That is one of the reasons why I am condemned continuously – because I am not in favor of any kind of poverty. Poverty is not spirituality, poverty is the cause of the disappearance of spirituality.
I would like the whole world to become as affluent as possible. The more affluent people are, the more they will become spiritual. They will have to, they will not be able to avoid it. And only then does real contentment arise.
When you can create inner richness and there comes a moment when again a harmony happens – outer richness meeting inner richness – then there is real contentment. When outer poverty meets inner poverty, there is false contentment. Harmony is possible in these two ways. The outer and inner in harmony, and one feels contented. India looks contented because there is poverty on both sides of the fence. There is perfect harmony, the outer and inner are in tune; but this is ugly contentment, this is really lack of life, lack of vitality. This is a stupid kind of contentment, dull, insipid.
The West is bound to become interested in meditation, there is no way to avoid it. That’s why Christianity is losing its hold on the Western mind – because Christianity has not developed the science of meditation in any way. It has remained a very mediocre religion; so has Judaism.
The West was poor: that is the reason. Up to now the West has lived in poverty. When the East was rich the West was poor. Judaism, Christianity, and Mohammedanism, all the three non-Indian religions, were born in poverty. They could not develop meditation techniques, there was no need. They have remained the religions of the poor.
Now the West has become rich and there is a disparity. The Western religions were born in poverty; they have nothing to give to the rich man. For the rich man they look childish, they don’t satisfy. They can’t satisfy him. The Eastern religions were born in richness; that’s why the Western mind is becoming more and more interested in the Eastern religions. Yes, the religion of Buddha is having a great impact. Zen is spreading like fire. Why? – it was born out of richness.
There is a tremendous similarity between the Western psychology of the contemporary man and the psychology of Buddhism. The West is in the same state as Buddha was when he became interested in meditation. It was a rich man’s search. And so is the case with Hinduism, so is the case with Jainism. These three great Indian religions were born out of affluence, hence the West is bound to be attracted to these Eastern religions.
The East is losing contact with its own religions. It cannot afford to understand Buddha. It is a poor country. You will be surprised – poor Indians are being converted to Christianity. Rich Americans are being converted to Buddhism, Hinduism, Vedanta. And the untouchables, the poor, the poorest of the poor in India, are becoming Christians. Do you see the point? Those religions have a certain appeal for the poor. But they don’t have any future because sooner or later the whole world is going to become rich.
You will not find many Indians here either because I don’t praise poverty, I have no respect for poverty. Poverty is illness, disease. It has to be uprooted completely. Man has to be given both kinds of richness. Why not both? Science has developed the technology to make you outwardly rich. Religion has developed the technology to make you inwardly rich: that is Yoga, Tantra, Taoism, Sufism, Hasidism – these are the technologies of the inner.
A story…

The central figure of this story is one of those persons who accepts everything that happens as the manifestation of a divine power. Not for him, he said, to question the workings of a Divine Providence.
All his life misfortune had been his, yet never once did he complain. He married, and his wife ran away with the hired man. He had a daughter, and the daughter was deceived by a villain. He had a son, and the son was lynched. A fire burned down his barn, a cyclone blew away his home, a hailstorm destroyed his crops, and the banker foreclosed on his mortgage, taking his farm. Yet at each fresh stroke of misfortune he knelt and gave thanks to “God Almighty for his interminable mercy.”
After a time, penniless but still submissive to the decrees from on high, he landed in the county poorhouse. One day the overseer sent him out to plow a potato field. A thunderstorm came up but was passing over when, without warning, a bolt of lightning descended from the sky. It melted the plowshare, stripped most of his clothing from him, singed off his beard, branded his naked back with the initials of a neighboring cowman, and hurled him through a barbed wire fence.
When he recovered consciousness he got slowly to his knees, clasped his hands and raised his eyes toward heaven. Then, for the first time, he asserted himself: “Lord,” he said, “this is getting to be plumb ridiculous!”

That is the situation in the East: “This is getting to be plumb ridiculous!” But the East goes on thanking God, goes on feeling grateful. There is nothing to feel grateful for anymore! The East is utterly poor, ill, starved; there is nothing to be grateful for. But the East has forgotten how to assert, the East has forgotten to do anything about its condition.
So the East cannot meditate. The East is living almost in a kind of unconsciousness. It is too hungry to meditate, too poor to pray. Its only interest is in bread, shelter, clothing. So when a Christian missionary comes and opens a hospital or opens a school, the Indians are very impressed – this is spirituality. When I start teaching about meditation they are not interested. Not only not interested, they are against it: “What kind of spirituality is this?” People come to me and they ask, “Can meditation give us bread?” And I understand. They need bread, they need shelter, they need clothes.
But it is because of their mind that they are suffering. On the one hand they need bread, shelter, clothes, better houses, better roads, and on the other hand they go on worshipping poverty. They are in a double bind. The East cannot meditate yet. First it needs scientific technology to make it a little physically better. Just as the West needs religious technology, the East needs scientific technology.
I am all for one world, where the West can fulfill the needs of the East and the East can fulfill the needs of the West. The East and the West have lived apart too long, there is no need any more. The East should not be the East any longer, and the West should not be the West any longer. We have come to that critical moment where this whole earth can become one – should become one – because it can survive only if it becomes one.
The days of nations are over, the days of divisions are over, the days of the politicians are over. We are moving in a tremendously new world, a new phase of humanity, and the phase is that now there can be only one world, only one single humanity. And then there will be a tremendous release of energies.
The East has treasures, the religious technologies, and the West has treasures, the scientific technologies. If they can meet, this very world can become a paradise. Now there is no need to ask for another world; we are capable of creating paradise here on this earth for the first time. And if we don’t create it, then except for us, nobody else is responsible for it.
I am for one world, one humanity, and ultimately one science which will take care of both – a meeting of religion and science – one science which will take care of both the inner and the outer.
That’s what I am trying to do here. It is a meeting place of East and West; it is a womb where the new humanity can be conceived, can be born. You are fortunate. You may not be aware that you are participating in something of eternal value, a great experiment upon which the whole future of humanity depends. If you become more conscious of it, it will be better because then you will be more helpful.
Enough for today.

============================================================

Bahauddin Shah once gave an address on the principles and practices of the Sufis. A certain man who thought that he was clever and could benefit from criticizing him, said, “If only this man would say something new! That is my only criticism.”
Bahauddin heard of this and invited the critic to dinner. “I hope that you will approve of my lamb stew,” he said. When he had taken the first mouthful, the guest jumped up, shouting, “You are trying to poison me – this isn’t lamb stew!”
“But it is,” said Bahauddin, “though since you don’t like old recipes, I have tried something new. This contains lamb all right, but there is a good dash of mustard, honey and emetic in it as well.”
Truth is. Truth simply is. It is neither old nor new. It is eternal, it has no reference to time at all; it is beyond time. That is the meaning of the eternal. Eternal does not mean forever because forever has a reference to time; eternal does not mean permanent because permanency has a reference to time. Eternal simply means timeless. It is.
Truth is never past and never future. It knows only one tense, the present. Truth knows only one time, now – which is not time at all, but timelessness. And truth knows only one space, here – which is not a space at all, it is the transcendence of space. Truth is always now-here. Truth has no history. History belongs to the world of lies. Politics has history, religion has no history.
This is the first thing to be understood: truth cannot be old and cannot be new either. If truth can be new, then one day it will become old. Whatever is new today will be old tomorrow. Truth is never old, hence it can never be new.
Truth is equivalent to existence. In a way, it can be said it is as old as the mountains and as new as this morning’s dewdrops, but that is only a way of saying. What is being said is that truth is eternal.
But there are people who are very much interested in the old. They are past-oriented. They believe in something only if it is very old. The older it is, they think, the better it is. All that is old is gold for them. They go on trying to prove that their scripture is the oldest scripture in the world, their religion the most ancient.
There is another group of people who think the new is always better than the old because it is new. It is more evolved, more improved, more refined.
These are the two kinds of people, both go on missing the truth. One is past-oriented, the other is future-oriented, and truth exists now, neither in the past nor in the future.
Before we can enter this small parable you will have to understand something about time – because basically it is a question of understanding time and its process. Time moves in a horizontal line from past to future. Time’s movement is linear; hence it is shallow, it can’t have any depth. One moment is followed by another moment and so on, so forth. Before you can catch hold of the moment it is already gone, so you cannot move into depth. You cannot dive in time; you can only float, you can only swim. It is very thin, it has no depth. It is horizontal.
Eternity is vertical: it moves into depth and into height. Just think of the cross of Jesus, it is a symbol of time and eternity. The cross is made of two lines, one horizontal on which Jesus’ hands were nailed, the other vertical on which his body was nailed. The cross represents the whole phenomenon of time. The horizontal line is history, politics, the mundane life, the world of events, the world of facts. The vertical line is the world of truth, not of facts. The vertical line is the world of absolute reality, of God, of nirvana, of meditation.
Whenever one starts moving into the vertical world, one simply goes beyond time. Then there is nothing new, nothing old. Truth only is.
Time, the horizontal line, consists of two things: the past and the future. The present is almost absent. You never become aware of the present – or have you ever become aware of the present? – because the moment you become aware, it is already past. You always become aware of the past.
For example, this moment: if you become aware of it, the time that is taken by your becoming aware is enough to make it past. The moment you say, “Yes, this is the present,” it is already gone. You cannot even utter the word now because when you have uttered it, it is no longer now. The present that you think exists in time is almost nothing. It is sandwiched between the past and the future. The past is big. Look backward: it stretches and stretches, on and on. It seems to be beginningless. And so is the future, very big: it goes on stretching ahead of you, on and on, endlessly.
Between these two big phenomena, the past and the future, your present is just a sandwiched atomic moment of which you cannot even become aware. The moment you know it, it is no longer there; it is already gone. You only become aware of the past. So time consists of the past and the future.
Eternity consists of the present. Then what we call “present” is nothing but the spot where eternity crosses time, where eternity penetrates time. There is a way to move into that eternity and that’s what meditation is all about.
Meditation is a drop into eternity. That’s why all techniques, all methods of meditation, insist: don’t be too obsessed with the past, let it go. And don’t be too infatuated with the future, let it go too. Slowly, slowly withdraw yourself from past memories and future projections. The past is no longer, the future is not yet; both are nonexistential. To remain in the nonexistential is to remain in misery – because existence is bliss, sat chit anand: it is truth, it is consciousness, it is bliss. Nonexistence is untruth, unconsciousness, misery – just the opposite. And we live in the nonexistential.
Just watch what goes on inside you. Either you are thinking of the past, the nostalgia of the past – your beautiful childhood, or your youth, your love affairs, and this and that, or you are immersed in the future – what you are going to do tomorrow, and the day after tomorrow. Either you are drowned in the past or you are drowned in the future. That’s why you are not. That’s why you yourself have become a falsehood. You are too concerned with the false and that concern makes you pseudo. Withdraw yourself from the past and the future.
Withdrawing yourself from the past and the future is real renunciation, is sannyas. Not by effort, remember: if you withdraw yourself by effort you will be deceived. If you withdraw yourself by effort, if you say, “I will withdraw myself from the past so that I can be in deep meditation,” then your deep meditation is a future project. Then it is neither meditation nor deep. You have already moved from the past to the future. If you say, “If I withdraw from the past, I will attain nirvana,” now you have only substituted the past with the future. Both are the same, both are nonexistential. It does not make any difference.
If you withdraw from your future, if you say, “I will not desire the future because I have to attain nirvana, enlightenment, satori,” it is the future. You cannot withdraw by effort because with effort you will always be motivated. There will be a desire, there will be a goal.
Then how to withdraw? You withdraw only by understanding the situation: the past is not, it is futile. Not that withdrawing from the past is going to lead you into the world of truth, no. Just seeing the futility of the past – it is all memory, dust that has gathered on the mirror of consciousness, it is just useless – you wash it away, with no motivation. Just seeing the futility of it, you drop it. Not that you drop it for something else; if you drop it for something else the future has entered. You have deceived yourself.
When you drop your past, seeing the futility of it, how can you go on living in the future? The future is always based on the past. Whatever you want tomorrow is nothing but all those beautiful things you had yesterday. You want a repetition – maybe modified, a little bit better, refined – but it is the past again. When the past is dropped by seeing the futility of it, just out of the understanding that it is futile, for no other reason, it drops out of your hands. With it the future also disappears. The future is the shadow of the past. You were with a woman yesterday and you would like to be with the woman again tomorrow: that is the future. Yesterday you went to Latif’s and the food was delicious; you are thinking of going there again tomorrow. Your tomorrow is nothing but a reflection of your yesterday. When yesterday disappears, reflections disappear. With the past, in the same package, the future is also dropped.
And then there is the present. Not that you asked for it, or you longed for it, or you desired and worked and practiced for it: no. Because the past and future are no longer there, the present is. The same space that was occupied by the past and the future is now empty. In that emptiness you feel the present.
And to be in the present is to be in truth. Then you have depth, you have fallen into the vertical dimension. You have heights, heights which are higher than Everest and depths which are deeper than the Pacific. Then your life has a grandeur, a splendor. This is what is called buddhahood, christ consciousness, or whatever you will.
There are people who are past-oriented, there are people who are future-oriented; both go on missing. The orthodox, the conformist, is past-oriented, and the revolutionary, the rebel, is future-oriented. There is not any difference between them. The orthodox thinks the Golden Age was in the past, the Garden of Eden. The revolutionary, the so-called communist, the fascist, the socialist thinks the Golden Age is to come. It is in the future, the utopia, the classless society where everyone will be equal, the world of freedom where exploitation will have disappeared and paradise will descend on the earth. But paradise is right now, here.
Beware of these two traps. You need not go into the past to search for truth. You need not go into the scriptures – because the scriptures belong to the past. And you need not go into imagination, logic – because all that logic can do is create utopias in the future. You need not go anywhere, neither in the past nor in the future. You have to be just here.
The utter beauty of the moment and the utter blessedness of the moment, and one is transformed, not by doing anything, but just by being here.
Allow yourself this fall into the present more and more. And you will be afraid because it is really a fall. You will be going into depths, and those depths are abysmal. There is no bottom, and we have become accustomed to floating on the surface. For many lives you have been just swimming on the surface; you have forgotten the depth of the ocean, of this reality. So when you start falling into the depth you will become afraid, you will have a very deep, frightening, scary experience; you will be in a panic.
That is the moment when you need a master to say to you, “Don’t be worried, there is nothing that can be lost, and that which can be lost is not worth keeping. That which is essential will remain with you, only the nonessential will be gone – and it is good that the nonessential goes.”
The man of awareness becomes a man of essence. Personality consists of the nonessential. Your soul consists of the essential, and the essential is immortal. The nonessential is momentary, and you cling to the nonessential; hence you suffer because you cannot keep hold of it. It disappears sooner or later. Whatever you do is futile because the momentary cannot be forever. Just as it comes, it goes. It is a wave, a ripple, a bubble. Sooner or later it will be gone. For the moment it looks so beautiful – the sun is reflected in it and a small rainbow surrounds it – but it is just a soap bubble. You can play with it but don’t become attached to it, otherwise you will suffer.
That’s why people are suffering: they become attached to soap bubbles. They have given different names to the soap bubbles. Somebody calls it love, somebody calls it money, somebody calls it power, somebody calls it life, prestige, and so on, so forth – but they are all soap bubbles. Any moment they will be gone, and the person will be left in despair. To cling to the personality is to cling to soap bubbles.
But this has been the attitude of your so-called thinkers down the ages. One party says the old is gold, and the older it is, the better. That’s what Hindus say: their Vedas are the oldest scriptures. That’s what the Jainas say their first tirthankara, Adinatha, is the ancientmost master in the world. It may be so, but it has nothing to do with truth. It has something to do with history, it has something to do with the body and the personality of Adinatha, but it has nothing to do with his inner truth, not at all.
Just the other day in the newspapers, I came across Morarji Desai’s statement about me, that I cannot be compared with Mahavira. Why? What can the problem be? Mahavira is old, ancient; twenty-five centuries have passed – how can Osho be compared to Mahavira? But Morarji Desai has to be reminded.
Jesus said of Abraham: I am before Abraham was. Abraham preceded Jesus by at least twenty-five centuries, just as Mahavira has preceded me. But Jesus says, “I am before Abraham was.” What does he mean? Morarji Desai would be at a loss.
I also say, “I am before Mahavira was.” The difference between me and Mahavira is only on the surface, on the horizontal line where we are separated by twenty-five centuries. But on the vertical? And it is the vertical which is significant, not the horizontal. On the vertical, we are not two.
That’s what Jesus is saying: “I am before Abraham was.” He is not saying that Jesus is older than Abraham. He is saying that this reality of I-amness, this truth of being, is eternal. It was there even before Abraham. But maybe Morarji Desai is not interested in Jesus and Abraham. He has a very conditioned Hindu mind. Then I will remind him of a great mystic, Gorakh. Gorakh says, “My master is my son, and my master’s master is my grandson, and my master’s master’s master is my great-grandson.” What does Gorakh mean? Is he just destroying the whole idea of history? The disciple saying that “My master is my son” now, is he putting things upside down? How can Gorakh be the father of his own master? And how can he be the grandfather of his own master’s master?
What he is saying is simply this: there is a sequence in time – the father precedes the son, never otherwise – but in the world of eternity nothing is preceded by anything, all simply is. There, distinctions, distinctions of time, disappear. Only one remains.
Morarji Desai is offended because some of my sannyasins met him and compared me with Mahavira. He was very angry. He said, “No, you cannot compare Osho with Mahavira.” Why? Essentially there is only one truth. Lies are many, truth is one. Diseases are many, health is one.
Mahavira moved in the vertical, disappeared as a personality and became the essence; so has it happened to Mohammed, so has it happened to Bahauddin, so has it happened to me – so can it happen to anybody who is courageous enough to take the jump into the vertical.
The moment you take the jump into the vertical, personality disappears; you are no longer abc. Then the taste is the same, just as it is the same salty taste from wherever you taste the ocean. The taste of truth is one. It is the same truth that Jesus tasted, it is the same truth that Buddha and Mahavira tasted. It is the same truth that I am tasting and you can taste. And that taste knows no time, no distance.
My disciples were not wrong. Each master contains all the masters of the past and all the masters of the future. I contain all the masters that have been and all the masters that will ever be – because the taste is the same. When one disappears, when the ego is no longer there and there is only an inner empty sky, when the forms of the clouds have disappeared into the formless sky, how can there be any difference?
Yes, clouds are different from each other. If you watch the sky, each cloud has a personality, a different form. You can even search: one cloud looks like an elephant, another cloud looks like a camel, and so on, so forth. But when all the clouds have disappeared, have you ever seen any personality in the sky? The sky is impersonal; it has no form, no color, no name. You cannot find your elephants and camels in the sky, it is utterly empty of all forms.
That is the state of a master. So whether it happens in this body or it happened twenty-five centuries ago in Mahavira’s body, or it happened five thousand years ago in Krishna’s body, it makes no difference. The sky was as formless in Krishna’s time as it is in my time, as it will always be. Only the clouds are different – but to be cloudy is to be unenlightened.
Unenlightened people cannot be compared. You will be surprised to know this: unenlightened people cannot be compared. They are all different because they are clouds. One is the elephant, another is the camel, and so on, so forth. Unenlightened people cannot be compared because they are wearing masks, and each is wearing a different mask: that is the personality. The nonessential is so important, and the nonessential is different. The essential is not different.
Just the other day I came across a very beautiful story…

Samuel Pinsky was on a camping expedition when he got stranded in a small town. Hungry and without money, he tried everywhere to get something to eat, but he was always met with the hostility which provincials generally show Jews. At last he had the good fortune to come across a small circus, the owner of which was of his own race. Sammy immediately applied for a job, explaining that he would starve if he did not get something to do.
The circus owner thought for a moment, and then said that one of his lions had died recently and that Sammy might have a job if he could get inside a lion’s skin and play lion. It was so arranged. Sammy was sewed into a lion’s skin and occupied a barred den, exposed to the view of the admiring circus throngs.
All went well until one afternoon he was startled to see a huge Bengal tiger come bounding down the chute that led into his cage.
Sammy took to his heels. Round and round the big cage he ran on all fours, with the tiger in hot pursuit. Finally, his last ounce of strength exhausted, the terrified Israelite fell to his knees, clasped his hands and began a Hebrew prayer: “Shema Yisrael Adonai Eloheinu Adonai Echad!” – Hear, O Israel, the Lord thy God is one!
The bounding Bengal tiger at once drew up and responded with the antiphony: “Baruch Shem Kevod Malchuto Le'olam Va'ed!” – Blessed be the name of his glory forever and forever!
“Oi, Jew,” exclaimed Sammy, tearing off his lion’s head.
“Oi, Jew,” returned the other, tearing off his tiger’s head.

When you drop your mask, when you drop your personality, when you look inward, when you see the inner sky, then who is Osho and who is Mahavira? Then who is Jesus and who is Abraham? Then who is Gorakh and who is Adinatha? All have disappeared, it is one truth.
But there are people who are too addicted to the past. Worship of the past is one of the most poisonous things in the world: it does not allow you to be herenow.
And there are others also. Once, a professor who is – or at least thinks he is – in deep love with me came to me, and he said, “Your disciples go on comparing you with Jesus, with Mahavira. It should not be done! I am also a lover of yours. How can you be compared with Mahavira? Twenty-five centuries have passed. You have twenty-five centuries’ more experience than Mahavira!” Now, he was angry – I should not be compared to Mahavira – just as Morarji Desai is angry for different reasons. He was saying, “It is insulting and humiliating that you should be compared to Mahavira. Twenty-five centuries have passed. In twenty-five centuries man has evolved, has become more knowing, has come to higher peaks.” He said, “Comparing you with Mahavira or Jesus is like comparing Albert Einstein to Newton.”
I had to tell him just exactly the same as I am telling you and Morarji Desai: time makes no difference. And his example is not right, that Newton and Albert Einstein cannot be compared, because both work in time. Certainly Albert Einstein is far ahead of Newton, Newton will look almost childish in comparison to Albert Einstein; but that is not the case with me and Mahavira.
It has nothing to do with human progress and all the explosion of knowledge in the world because it is not a question of knowledgeability. I may know more than Mahavira ever did. Certainly, he had not read Sigmund Freud, he knew nothing about Albert Einstein, that is true, but that has nothing to do with the inner space.
After twenty-five centuries have passed, again, somebody will be there, ahead, coming; he will know more than I know. Certainly he will know more than I know, but still there will be no difference, not an iota – because it is not a question of knowledge and it is not a question of social evolution. It is a question of no-mind, it is a question of innocence. It is not a question of better universities, better books, better information about the world. It has nothing to do with that.
In fact, one has to drop all that one knows to go in. Mahavira dropped whatever he knew. I dropped whatever I knew. When Mahavira became completely devoid of his knowledge, he attained. That’s how it happened to me: whatever I knew, I dropped it. So I may have dropped a bigger burden than Mahavira, that is true, but that makes no problem. I may have had to clean and wash more dust from my mirror than Mahavira ever had to, but once the dust is cleaned and the mirror is reflecting perfectly, it is the same quality, the same mirroring. It has nothing to do with dust.
Will you say that this mirror is greater because we had to remove more dust from this mirror than the other mirror – because less dust had to be removed from the other mirror? Less and more dust make no difference.
Once a person has arrived, all that we know is irrelevant. He simply disappears from the world of time into the world of eternity – and that is the world of truth.
This question of comparison arises again and again. It has to be understood; it will be good if it is clear to you. Two unenlightened people cannot be compared because they are only personalities and nothing else. And personalities are different because personalities are like diseases. Two enlightened persons can be compared because they are no longer personalities, but if you think of their personalities, they also cannot be compared.
For example, if you look at Mahavira through his personality – as Morarji Desai is doing – then he is right. But that is not the right way to look at Mahavira or to look at me or to look at Bahauddin. Yes, Mahavira walked naked; I am not walking naked, so certainly I am different, he is different. This is a difference of the frame of the mirror, not of the mirror.
Just the other day I read in another newspaper that a Christian has asked why I am compared to Jesus. “Why do people go on comparing Osho with Jesus? Jesus never lived in an air-conditioned house.” That’s true – poor Jesus – but that is not the question at all. Jesus ate meat, I do not eat meat. Jesus drank alcohol, I do not drink alcohol. Do you think eating meat and drinking alcohol is a lesser sin than living in an air-conditioned room? I don’t think living in an air-conditioned room is a sin at all. I have never come across any scriptures about it! Certainly, if you look through the personality, I am a different person – and Jesus is different.
Krishna had sixteen thousand wives – poor man. Just think of it, how much he must have suffered. One wife is enough to create hell! Sixteen thousand wives…Certainly I have a different personality than Krishna had, but personality is not the essential thing. It is just the outer frame of the mirror. Buddha had a different personality, so had Lao Tzu. All masters have different personalities if you look from the outside. Certainly, they lived in their time, in their own way. They did their thing, I’m doing my thing.
This is why Morarji Desai thinks I cannot be compared to Mahavira – Mahavira believed in fasting, and I believe in feasting. Mahavira lived naked, never used any vehicle. I move in a car, certainly I am different. But so was Krishna; he was moving in a gold chariot. What does Morarji Desai say about that? And Krishna used beautiful clothes – not only clothes, he used ornaments like women use. In those days it was a common thing and it seems to be more natural. If you look into nature, you will always find it.
For example, if you look at the peacocks, the male peacock has all the colors. The male peacock is decorated, the female peacock is not decorated. It is enough for the female peacock to be female; that’s enough, nothing else is needed. That is more than is needed, that makes her beauty. Just her feminine energy is enough attraction. But the male substitutes: he does not have that feminine beauty, that feminine, elusive mystery. He has to create some substitutes. Nature provides. The male peacock is very decorated, ornamental.
And so is it the case with all the animals. When you hear the cuckoo calling from the mango grove, it is the male cuckoo whose sound is so sweet. It is a substitute. You can see it everywhere.
In those old days, in Krishna’s time, man was also decorating himself – ornaments, all kinds of beautiful clothes, colorful designs. Now, if suddenly Krishna appeared in front of the Blue Diamond, the police would catch hold of him: “Looks like a mad hippie! What is he doing here?”
Personalities are different – and it is good, perfectly good. Krishna had to live in his time, I have to live in my time. He used ornaments, that was the universal phenomenon. It was natural, it was befitting, it was in harmony with the background of his life. Jesus lived in his own way, I have to live in my own way. I am nobody’s imitation. I am not imitating Christ or Krishna or Buddha or Mahavira here. I am living in my own way. I have to sing my song.
So if you listen to the songs, just to the words of the songs, they will be different, and they cannot be compared, that is true. But if you listen to the soundless source of the songs, if you go deeper into the music of the songs, into the rhythm of them, you will find the same rhythm, the same music, the same melody. The words are different: Krishna was speaking in Sanskrit, Mahavira was speaking in Prakrit, Buddha was speaking in Pali, Jesus was speaking in Aramaic. Now, I cannot speak in Aramaic and I cannot speak in Pali. That would be utterly meaningless. Even if I could speak it, with whom would I speak? What would be the point of it? I speak the language that can be understood, and I speak in the metaphors that can be understood.
In that sense – if you look at the personality, at the form, of a certain master – no master can be compared to anybody else because personalities cannot be compared. But if you look at the deepest core, not at the circumference but at the center of the cyclone, then all masters are one.

Joshu asked his master, Nansen, “What is the Way?”
Nansen said, “It is everyday mind.”
Joshu said, “Then one should aim at this, shouldn’t one?”
Nansen said, “The moment you aim at anything, you have already missed it.”
Joshu said, “If I do not aim at it, how can I know the Way?”
Nansen said, “The Way has nothing to do with knowing or not-knowing. Knowing is perceiving, but blindly. Not-knowing is just blankness. If you have already reached the unaimed-at Way, it is like space: an absolutely clear void. You cannot force it one way or the other.”
At that instant Joshu was awakened to the profound meaning. His mind was like the bright full moon. Suddenly, he himself became that space, that clear, void emptiness.

Look into me, and you will find the same taste as was found by the disciples of Mahavira.
But the taste of a master is available only to the disciples. Morarji Desai cannot have it. He does not deserve it! Only a disciple is worthy enough to partake of the being of the master. Only disciples can understand what the master is. Jesus was known by his disciples; others crucified him. The others were millions and the disciples were few. Couldn’t those other people see that he was the son of God? Had they seen that he was the son of God, would it have been possible for them to crucify him? They could not see a thing, they were utterly blind. Only a few disciples were aware of something that had entered Jesus from the beyond – but only a few were aware.
And you will be surprised: had Morarji Desai been there, he would not have been aware because the people of those days behaved in the same way as they are behaving with me today. The politicians were against Jesus. He was crucified by the conspiracy of the politicians and the priests. The professors and the pundits were against Jesus, the great rabbis were against him, the so-called virtuous people were against him. It looks really very paradoxical that he was understood by a prostitute like Mary Magdalene. He was understood by fishermen, woodcutters, villagers, innocent people. And the rabbis? And the professors? And the priests? And the politicians? – they could not see anything in him. They only saw some kind of danger. They only saw that this man’s existence could be a beginning of rebellion. It was better to finish off this man, it was better to destroy this man, so the seed was destroyed. Otherwise this man would bring chaos.
That’s what they are seeing again in me. In fact, they have started becoming afraid.
Just a few days ago, I had told you that a day may come when my sannyasins will have to go underground. I was simply meaning that you can easily go underground if you don’t wear orange and the mala. In fact, the day I had decided to give you the color orange and the mala and a certain uniform of a sannyasin, this was part of the consideration: if you become visible, you can easily become invisible, at any moment. That is the secret of becoming invisible. You move in orange, you are a visible sannyasin. Going underground will be so simple: you simply don’t move in orange, and you are underground.
Now, from Delhi, the Pune police have received a note to go deep into this matter: “What does he mean by saying, ‘My sannyasins will have to go underground’?” Just stupid people. And if I call them stupid, they become very angry. They think I am slandering them, that I am abusing them. I am simply stating a fact.

Mrs. Vandergelt took her Peke to the vet. “There is something wrong with Fido,” she told the dog doc. “Yesterday I gave him a savory bone to chew on, but he refused it. This morning I tried to give him a piece of broiled sirloin steak, but he just walked away from it. And this afternoon I put him next to a cute little female Peke, but my Fido just turned up his nose at her.”
The vet looked up from the dog and shook his head. “There is nothing wrong with your dog, madam,” he told her. “He is just stupid.”

Now, what can one do? The facts have to be stated as they are. The politicians have always been stupid, this is nothing new. Otherwise why should they be politicians? They would have been poets, they would have been mystics, they would have been painters, they would have been musicians, they would have been dancers. But when a person cannot be anything, when he has no talents, no intelligence, the last possibility is, he becomes a politician. Because in politics, stupidity is an asset. The more stupid you are, the more is your possibility of reaching to the top – because it needs arrogance, violence. It needs insensitivity, it needs hatred, jealousy, ambition, to reach the top of the ladder. And it needs utter unintelligence. Otherwise who would be interested in becoming just a ladder climber? Life has much more to give.
Just sitting under a tree and playing on your flute is far more satisfying than being the president of a country. Just being in love with a woman or a man is far more satisfying than having all the riches of the world and all the power that it can give.

When Alexander the Great came to India and conquered the frontier provinces, he was surprised to see one thing: people were so contented, so happy. He could not believe his eyes. There was such order, and there seemed to be no imposition on them. He asked the king, whom he had conquered and defeated… In fact, the king was defeated because he had never prepared for war. His whole energy had been devoted to peace. It was a beautiful country and people were happy, and people were still singing and dancing, and people were grateful to God. They had not thought that somebody was going to conquer them. For what? In fact, no resistance was given to Alexander the Great. People were not ready at all; they were simply surprised by the whole idea that somebody had started on a great movement, a struggle to conquer the whole world. They were puzzled: “For what?”
Even Alexander was puzzled and surprised seeing the peace and the contentment and the joy. Even when the people were defeated there was nothing – as if nothing had happened. Things continued as they were, as if nothing had happened.
He asked the king, “How have you managed this, this order? And I don’t see much military, much police. I don’t see much government machinery. And people are living with such love and brotherhood. How have you managed?”
The king said, “It has nothing to do with me. My prime minister is a mystic. It is his work.”
“Where is your prime minister?” Alexander said. “I would like to see him, I would like to talk to him, I would like to learn something from him. I would like my country to also be in such order, in such inner discipline. I have fallen in love with the grace that I see all around. Although you are defeated, I don’t see any sadness – as if I don’t mean much.”
The king said, “The prime minister has become a sannyasin now, he has moved to the mountains. It may be difficult to find him.”
But Alexander was insistent, so messengers were sent.
But the messengers came back. They said, “That old man has said that he is not interested in showing himself off to any Alexander, to any great king and conqueror, because the very idea of conquering others is so stupid: ‘I am not interested in coming. Just go and tell him that I don’t think that he is even worthy enough to be given any advice.’”

The politician’s whole mind is nothing but ambition, and ambition is violent, ambition is murderous. It is ambition that has made the whole earth a hell.
Morarji Desai also thinks that I am slandering him, that I am abusing him. I am not. I have nothing to do with Morarji Desai. When I say something against any politician, it is being said against politicians as such. It has no personal difference.
Now this small story:
Bahauddin Shah once gave an address on the principles and practices of the Sufis. A certain man who thought that he was clever and could benefit from criticizing him, said, “If only this man would say something new! That’s my only criticism.”
Bahauddin: …gave an address on the principles and practices of the Sufis. There is only one principle, and there is only one practice. What is the principle? The principle is that only God exists. There is no god but God. That is the principle, that is the very seed of Sufism. Only God is – in millions of forms. Forms are different, personalities are different, but deep down, if you go on searching for the innermost core, you will always find God and nothing else. This is the fundamental principle, all other principles are secondary. This is the cornerstone of the temple of Sufism: God is.
And God cannot be new or old. You cannot use words like “was” in reference to God; you cannot say “God was,” you cannot say “God will be.” You can use only one tense, the present tense, for God: God is. God always is, so how can it be new or old? Yes, expressions can be old, but not the truth expressed. Bottles can be new but not the wine. What I am saying is just a new bottle for the eternal wine. That’s what Bahauddin was saying.
But you can always criticize, and criticism can have two possibilities. One is: you can say, “This is something new.” There are people for whom it is enough criticism to say, “This is something new.” New means wrong – because if it were the truth, others would have found it before you. How did it wait so long? If it is new it must be wrong. Why is it not in the Vedas? Why didn’t Jesus say anything about it? Why did Buddha keep quiet about it? If they were knowers they must have known it, so if it is not there, something is wrong.
This is one criticism: the people who always like the old, for whom if something is old it is bound to be right – as if only Jesus is old and Judas is not old; as if only Rama is old and Ramana is not old; as if only Krishna is old and not the people who were against him. They are as old, so if something is just old it does not mean that it is right.
Then there is the other party; the man must have belonged to the other party. He says there is only one criticism: “If only this man would say something new. That is my only criticism.” He is saying, “You are just saying old things which everybody knows. There is no need to talk about old things, saying ‘God is, truth is, truth is eternal.’ This has been said so many times. Why go on repeating it? Say something new! If you have something new to say, say it!”
It is not a question of saying it, it is not a question of repeating it. Bahauddin is not repeating Mohammed. What he is saying is his own experience. Now, what can he do if his experience and Mohammed’s experience coincide?
What I am saying is not a repetition of Buddha or Mahavira. I am saying it from my own experience, on my own authority. It is my experience, in that sense it is new. But what can I do? It has been the experience of all the buddhas too. So in a sense, it is as old as the mountains and as new as the dewdrop on the grass leaves in the early sun.
This is the paradox of truth: everyone has to know it on his own. Then it is new – but it is the same truth. Buddha went to the sea and tasted it, and he said, “It is salty.” After twenty-five centuries I went to the sea and tasted it, and I said, “It is salty.”
Now the question is, is what I am saying just a repetition of Buddha? If I had not gone to the sea, and just reading scriptures I had repeated like a parrot that the taste of the sea is salty because Buddha says it is so – and I trust him, he must be saying what is right; who bothers to go to the ocean? When Buddha has said so, it is finished, it is decided forever – then it would have been a repetition.
But I went to the sea; I tasted the sea and I found that it is salty. Now what should I do? Just because Buddha has also said it is salty, should I not say it is salty because people will think it is a repetition? But then I would be lying! Should I say it is sweet? Then it would be untrue. I have to be truthful, so I have to say two things: one, that I have tasted it myself, and the second, that now I am a witness that Buddha was right. I am not saying it on Buddha’s authority, I am saying it on my own authority. In fact, I am giving Buddha a witness, an eye witness, that whatever he said twenty-five centuries ago was true, was right. I know it through my own experience.
That’s what Bahauddin was doing. Now, that man said… He thought that he was clever, and clever people, or at least the people who think they are clever, are almost always stupid people. Only stupid people have the idea that they are clever.
A really intelligent person is not clever. When you have intelligence, what need do you have of being clever? Your very life shows your intelligence. The clever person is trying to show that he is intelligent, and only one who is not intelligent tries to show that he is intelligent. Remember this. Only the ugly person tries to show that he is beautiful, and only the ignorant tries to show his knowledge.
The man who knows never tries to show it. It is seen by others, it happens on its own accord. When spring comes and the trees bloom, they are not advertising, “Come and see.” But their perfume spreads to the winds, people start coming. And if people don’t come – because people are so blind, they have lost all sensitivity – then at least the bees come, butterflies come, birds come, and that is enough. But they come on their own.
When perfume is released to the winds the people start coming. There is no need to brag about the fact. The person who is trying to be clever simply shows he is not clever. He is afraid. If he does not show it, he will be caught. If he does not show his knowledge, he will be caught: people may come to know he is ignorant. Before they come to know, he has to make much noise.

Morarji Desai was interviewed on the BBC a few days ago and the interviewer asked a very relevant question, significant too: “You talk so much of morality, why don’t you lead your country morally?”
Morarji Desai said in anger, “Then what am I doing? I am leading my country both politically and morally. Do you mean to say that I should leave my prime ministership and lead the country only morally? Do you think yourself very smart? Nobody has asked this question of me. Do you think that you are very smart?”

Now, the man had not asked anything wrong. It was a relevant question: if you talk about morality so much, why don’t you become a moral teacher? Why are you wasting your time being a prime minister? Then lead the country morally! Because what does a politician have to do with morality? A politician is bound to be immoral. Immorality is a strategy for the politician, and morality too. He talks about morality to hide all the immoral practices that he goes on doing behind it. The morality, and the talk about it, and the religion, are just a camouflage.
The man had asked a relevant question, but Morarji became very much annoyed. And this is not a right way to answer, to ask, “Do you think you are very smart? Nobody has been able to ask me such a question up to now.”
My feeling is that the man was really intelligent. He simply said, “Thank you,” and finished the interview. He must have been really intelligent. Now there was no point in continuing. Now there was no meaning. But why did Morarji Desai jump upon the poor man and ask him, “Do you think you are very smart?” That’s what he himself was trying to show, that he was very smart, very clever.
The really intelligent person does not try to show that he is clever or smart. He is clever, so there is no need to show it. He is not even conscious of it; he is unselfconsciously intelligent. Cleverness is a plastic substitute for real intelligence.
This man: …who thought that he was clever and could benefit from criticism, said, “If only this man could say something new! That is my only criticism.” Now, he must have been a believer in the new; the new is right. If anything is new, it is bound to be right. That is another extreme of the same stupidity. One extreme is: if anything is old, it is bound to be right. The other extreme of the same stupidity is that if anything is new, it is bound to be right.
Right has nothing to do with old and new. Right is right, whether old or new doesn’t matter. It does not add anything to it.
Bahauddin heard of this and invited the critic to dinner.
That was his way of creating a situation.
“I hope that you will approve of my lamb stew,” he said.
When he had taken the first mouthful, the guest jumped up, shouting, “You are trying to poison me – this is not lamb stew!”
“But it is,” said Bahauddin,”though since you don’t like old recipes, I have tried something new. This contains lamb all right, but there is a good dash of mustard, honey and emetic in it as well.”
This was Bahauddin’s way of teaching. Now, Buddha would not have done this, neither would Mahavira. This was Bahauddin’s way; he wanted to create a real situation. He was a very scientific mind: he wanted to hammer the truth while the situation was hot. He did not believe in talking, he believed in a pragmatic experimentation. He was very empirical. Rather than refuting the man verbally, he refuted the man in a very realistic way. Now he has shown the man his stupidity without saying a word. Now the situation was such that the man could not argue.
Just by being new, nothing becomes significant. And just by being old, nothing becomes wrong either.
Bahauddin is saying, “What can I do? If I were to mix something of my own into my statements of truth just to make it new, it would be just like this stew. It: …contains lamb all right, but there is a good dash of mustard, honey and emetic in it as well. It would be poisonous, it would not be nourishing.”
Man has existed for centuries; truth has been discovered again and again and again. Many people have reached to the ultimate light; they have expressed it in their own ways. Their languages are different but their message is the same.
It is as if a few people go to see a sunset. One is a painter; he paints it. He is thrilled by the beauty of the sunset. He immediately goes to work; he is lost in his painting, he forgets everything, he has to paint the sunset. It has stirred his whole heart. That is his way of expressing it. Another man, seeing the same sunset, may simply sit silently and watch it. He is also thrilled, but he goes into deep meditation. One can see the grace on the man’s face. One can see that it is not only that the sun is setting, something is disappearing in the man too. Maybe it is the ego that is setting. He has fallen into a deep harmony with the sunset; he is no longer separate, he is part of it, part of the whole scene. He has disappeared as a spectator, he has melted into it. And the third may start playing on his flute; the sunset has become a song in him. And the fourth may start dancing. The message is the same, but the mediums are very different.
Now, if later on you come to hear a recording of the flute, and you see a film of the dancer, and you see the painting of the painter, and you see a photograph of the meditator, will you be able to recognize that the source of it all was a sunset? Will you be able to logically reach the conclusion that they have all expressed the same thing? It will be impossible. Logically it is impossible – what relationship will you be able to find between the flute and the painting? What relationship is there between sound and color? How will you deduce that those colors represent the same thing as those sounds? And how will you be able to see that one man started dancing and another became so silent that he looked like a statue? How can the same sunset stir such different manifestations? Still it was the same sunset.
It created dance in Krishna, it made Buddha a marble statue, it made Jesus sacrifice his all, it made Mahavira go naked in utter innocence, like a child. Different manifestations, but the source is the same.
But how can you deduce it logically? Logically there is no way – unless you have also come upon the sunset. If you have seen the sunset, then you will be able to understand that the dance and the song on the flute and the painting and the man meditating are all using different languages – because they are talented in different languages and because they know different ways of expression – but the experience that triggered those different manifestations came from the same source, the same sunset.
Bahauddin speaks in his own way, but the truth remains the same. Truth is eternal. Truth is. Truth simply is. It is never new, it is never old – or, it is as old as the mountains and as new as the dewdrops on the grass leaves in the early sun. It is both and it is neither; it is both and beyond.
But you cannot arrive at this conclusion only by thinking, you will have to move into experiencing. Truth has to become an existential phenomenon to you, you have to live it. Only by living it will you be able to know it, not vice versa. Not by knowing it would you be able to live it, no.
That’s what has been traditionally told to you: know about truth so that you can practice and live it. That is utter nonsense. Live truth so that you can know it. Living comes first, experiencing comes first, and then the shadow falls on your intelligence too, and your intelligence can make an understanding out of it.
That’s why Bahauddin created this situation; otherwise it would have been an unnecessary argument. This was his way. Each master has his own way, but the truth is the same forever and forever.

A monk asked, “When I wish to become a buddha, what then?”
Joshu said, “You have set yourself quite a task, haven’t you?”
The monk asked, “When there is no effort, what then?”
Joshu said, “Then you are a buddha already.”

You are truth. There is no need to know about it; you have to be silently listening to it in your inner world. You have to become still, calm and quiet, and suddenly the truth arises in you. Truth is already the case.

Once Joshu was asked about the “holy” person, the “purified” person.
He responded, “There is no room in my place for such a rascal! Why should one be purer than one originally is? And moreover, there is no one to be pure or impure inside.”
Then he was asked, “Who is Joshu?”
He said, “A rustic.” And that is what he happened to be: a Chinese peasant.
Then he was asked, “Then who is the buddha?”
He laughed and pointed to the field and said, “The man leading his oxen, it is he.”

You are divine, you are buddhas. You have forgotten about it, that’s all. It has to be remembered. All that is needed is remembering. Nothing has to be achieved, you are it already. Truth is your very being, so it has not to be achieved. You have fallen into a kind of sleep. Awake, and you will know it – and you will not know it as an object, you will know it as your very subjectivity.
Søren Kierkegaard says, “Truth is subjectivity.” He is right. Truth is your innermost core.
And that is the only principle of the Sufis: Only truth is – or, only God is. How to practice it? Then too there is only one single practice, zikr: remember. Come out of your sleep: remember.
Enough for today.

============================================================

The first question:
Osho,
What is simplicity?
Simplicity is living without ideals. Ideals create complexity, ideals create division in you and hence complexity. The moment you are interested in becoming somebody else, you become complex. To be contented with yourself as you are is simplicity. The future brings complexity; when you are utterly in the present you are simple.
Simplicity does not mean to live a life of poverty. That is utterly stupid because the person who imposes a life of poverty on himself is not simple at all. He is a hypocrite. The need to impose poverty means deep down he hankers for the diametrically opposite; otherwise why should there be any need to impose it? You impose a certain character upon yourself because you are just the opposite of it.
The angry person wants to become compassionate, the violent person wants to become nonviolent. If you are nonviolent you will not try to become nonviolent. For what? The person who imposes poverty upon himself is simply trying to live out a life according to others, not according to his own innermost core, not according to his own spontaneity. And to live according to others is never to be simple.
To live according to others means to live a life of imitation. It will be a plastic life; you will be one thing on the surface and just the opposite of it in your depths. And only the depths matter, the surface never matters. You will be a saint on the surface and a sinner deep down. And that’s what is going to be decisive about you because God is only in contact with your depth, not with your surface.
The surface is in contact with the society, existence is in contact with the depth. Existence only knows what you are, it never knows what you are pretending. Existence never knows about your acting. You may be pretending to be a great saint, a mahatma, but existence will never know about it because it never knows about anything false. Anything false happens outside of existence. It knows only the real, the real you.
Simplicity means to just be yourself, whosoever you are, in tremendous acceptance, with no goal, with no ideal. All ideals are crap; scrap all of them.
It needs guts to be simple. It needs guts because you will be in constant rebellion. It needs guts because you will never be adjusted to the so-called – rotten – society that exists around you. You will constantly be an outsider. But you will be simple, and simplicity has beauty. You will be utterly in harmony with yourself. There will be no conflict within you, there will be no split within you.
An ideal brings a split. The bigger the ideal, the bigger is going to be the split. An ideal means somewhere in the future one day, maybe in this life or another life, you will be a great saint. Meanwhile you are a sinner. It helps you to go on hoping, it helps you to go on believing in the surface – that tomorrow everything will be okay, that tomorrow you will be as you should be. Today can be tolerated. You can ignore it, you need not note it, you need not take any notice of it. The real thing is going to be tomorrow. But tomorrow never comes. It is always today, it is always today.
And the person who lives in ideals goes on missing reality because reality is now, here. To be now and to be here is to be simple: to be like the trees, herenow, to be like the clouds, herenow, to be like the birds, herenow, to be like buddhas, herenow. An ideal needs the future. Simplicity is not an ideal. People have made an ideal out of simplicity too, such is human stupidity.
Simplicity can never be an ideal because no ideal can create simplicity. It is the ideal which poisons you and makes you complex, divides you, makes two persons in you – the one you are and the one you would like to be. Now there is going to be a constant war, a civil war.
And when you are fighting with yourself – the violent person trying to be nonviolent, the ugly person trying to be beautiful, and so on, so forth – when you are constantly trying, endeavoring to be something else that you are not, your energy is dissipated in that conflict, your energy goes on leaking. And energy is delight. To have energy is to be alive, to be fresh, to be young.
Look at people’s faces, how dull they appear. Look into their eyes, their eyes have lost all luster and all depth. Feel their presence and you will not feel any radiance, you will not feel any energy streaming from them. On the contrary you will feel as if they are sucking you. Rather than overflowing with energy they have become black holes. They suck you, they exploit your energy. Being with them you become poorer. That’s why when you go into a crowd and come back you feel tired, weary, you feel exhausted, you need rest. Why? Why after being in a crowd do you feel as if you have lost something? – you certainly lose something because the crowd consists of black holes. And the more unintelligent the crowd is, the more of a mob it is, the more you will feel exhausted.
That’s why when you are alone, sitting silently, not with anybody – in a tremendous celibate state, just alone – you become replenished, rejuvenated. That’s why meditation makes you younger, makes you livelier. You start sharing something with existence. Your energy is no longer frozen, it starts flowing. You are in a kind of dance, as the stars are. A song arises in you.
In the crowd you always lose. In meditation you always gain. Why? What happens in meditation? In meditation you become simple; the future is no longer your concern. That’s what meditation is all about: dropping the concern with past and future, being herenow. Only this moment exists. And whenever it happens, whenever only this moment exists – watching a sunrise, or looking at a white cloud floating in the sky, or just being with a tree, silently communing, or observing a bird on the wing – whenever you forget all about the past and the future and the present moment takes possession of you, when you are utterly possessed by this moment, you feel rejuvenated. Why? The split disappears, the split created by the ideals. You are one in that moment, integrated, you are all together.
Simplicity is not an ideal, you cannot impose simplicity on yourself. That’s why I never say that people like Mahatma Gandhi are simple. They are not, they cannot be. Simplicity is their ideal, they are trying to attain it. Simplicity is a goal far away in the future, distant, and they are striving, they are straining, they are in great effort. How can you create simplicity out of effort? Simplicity simply means that which is. Out of effort you are trying to improve upon existence.
Existence is perfect as it is, it needs no improvement. The so-called saints go on constantly improving upon themselves: drop this, drop that, repress this, impose that, this is not good, that is good. Continuous effort, and in that very effort they are lost.
Simplicity is a state of effortlessness. It is humbleness: not the humbleness created against arrogance, not the humbleness created against the ego, not the humbleness opposite to the proud mind. No, humbleness is not the opposite of pride. Humbleness is simply the absence of pride.
Try to see the point. If your humbleness is against your pride, if you have strived to drop your pride, your ego, your arrogance, what you have done is only repression. Now you will become proud of your humbleness, now you will start bragging how humble you are. This is what happens. Just see the so-called humble people; they are constantly broadcasting that they are humble.
The really humble people will not know they are humble, how can they then brag about it? How can the humble person know he is humble? The humble person is no longer a person. The humble person is in a state of fana: the humble person has dissolved. Now he is only a presence. Humbleness is a presence, not a characteristic of personality, not a trait, but just a presence. Others will feel it, but he will not be able to feel it himself.
So is the case with simplicity. Simplicity simply means living spontaneously moment to moment, not according to some philosophy, not according to Jainism, Buddhism, Hinduism, not according to any philosophy. Whenever you live according to a philosophy you have betrayed yourself, you are an enemy to yourself. Simplicity means to be in a deep friendship with yourself, to live your life with no idea interfering.
It certainly needs guts because you will be living in constant insecurity. The man who lives with ideals is secure. He is predictable, that is his security. He knows what he is going to do tomorrow. He knows, if a certain situation arises, this is the way he will react to it. He is always certain. The man who is simple knows nothing about tomorrow, knows nothing about the next moment, because he is not going to act out of his past. He will respond out of his present awareness.
The simple person has no character; only the complex person has character. Good or bad, that is not the point. There are good characters and bad characters, but both are complex. The simple person is characterless, he is neither good nor bad, but he has a beauty which no good people, no bad people can ever have. And the good and the bad are not very different, they are aspects of the same coin. The good person is bad behind it and the bad person is good behind it.
You will be surprised to know that saints always dream that they are committing sins. If you look into the dreams of your so-called saints you will be very surprised. What kinds of dreams do they go on seeing? It is their suppressed mind that bubbles up, surfaces in their dreams. Sinners always dream that they have become saints. Sinners have the most beautiful dreams because they have been committing sins during their whole life. They are tired of all those things. Now the denied part starts speaking to them in their dreams.
In dreams the denied part speaks to you, your unconscious speaks to you. The unconscious is the denied part. Remember, if you are good in your conscious, if you have cultivated good characteristics in your conscious, you will be bad: all that you have denied will become your unconscious, and vice versa.
The simple person has no conscious, no unconscious. He has no division. He is simply aware. His whole house is full of light. His whole being knows only one thing: awareness. He has not denied anything, hence he has not created the unconscious. This is something to be understood.
Sigmund Freud and Carl Gustav Jung and Alfred Adler and others think that the conscious and the unconscious are something natural. They are not. The unconscious is a by-product of civilization. The more civilized a person is, the bigger an unconscious he has because civilization means repression. Repression means he is denying a few parts of his being from coming into the light, he is pushing them into darkness, he is throwing them into his basement so that he never comes across them.
People have thrown their sex, their anger, their violence into the basement, and they have locked the doors. But violence, sex, and anger, and things like that cannot be locked up. They are like ghosts. They can pass through walls, there is no way to prevent them. If one succeeds in preventing them in the daytime, they will come in the night – they will haunt him in his dreams.
It is because of the unconscious that people dream. The more civilized a person, the more he dreams. Go to the aboriginals, the natural people – a few still exist – and you will be again surprised to know that they don’t dream much, very rarely, once in a while. Years pass and they never report any dreaming. They simply sleep without dreams because they have not repressed anything. They have been living naturally. The simple person will not have an unconscious, the simple person will not have dreams. But the complex person will have dreams.
Mahatma Gandhi said that although he had succeeded in attaining celibacy as far as the waking consciousness is concerned, in dreams sexual imagery still floated into his being. To the very end he had sexual dreams, and he was very puzzled. He was puzzled because he was absolutely miseducated about the whole phenomenon. He thought that he had done whatever one could do to be celibate. And he had done that; there is no question about his sincerity as far as his efforts were concerned, he was very sincere. He had done all that is said by the tradition, and he had failed.
In Mahatma Gandhi’s failure the whole tradition failed – the tradition of repression, the tradition of denying, the tradition of life negation, the tradition of imposing ideals. All failed in his experiment because in the night whenever he would sleep, the unconscious would start speaking, and the denied parts would start playing in his mind. All that he had denied would surface.
That’s what happens to you. If you fast one day, in the night you will have a feast in your dreams. In dreams Deeksha is bound to invite you for a special treat! The fast creates the feast in the dream. And the people who are feasting in the day may start thinking of fasting; they always think about it.
It is only rich countries which become interested in fasting. Now only America is interested in fasting, dieting, and all things like that. A poor country cannot think of fasting. A poor country is always fasting, always dieting, always undernourished. Only rich people think of fasting. In India, Jainas are the richest community, their religion consists of fasting. Mohammedans are the poorest, their religion consists of feasting. When a poor man celebrates a religious day he gives a feast. When a rich man celebrates his religious day he fasts.
You can see the logic in it. We go on compensating. The dream is compensatory, it compensates your waking life. The simple man will not dream, the simple man will not have an unconscious.
The simple man will be simple. He will live moment to moment with no idea how to live, he will not have any philosophy of life. He will trust in his intelligence. What is the need of having a philosophy? Why should one have a philosophy? – so that it can guide you. It means if you are stupid you need a philosophy of life so that it can guide you. If you are intelligent you don’t need any philosophy of life. Intelligence is enough unto itself, a light unto itself.
A blind man asks for guidance: “Where is the door? In what direction should I move? Where is the turn?” Only the blind man prepares himself before he takes any move. The man who has eyes simply moves because he can see. When the door comes he will know, and when the turn comes he will know. He can trust in his eyes.
That is the case with the inner world too. Trust in your intelligence, don’t trust in philosophies of life; otherwise you will remain stupid. The major part of humanity has remained unintelligent because it has trusted in philosophies of life – Christian, Hindu, Mohammedan.
Again, something of very great importance to be remembered: each child is born intelligent. Intelligence is not something that a few have and a few don’t have. Intelligence is the fragrance of life itself. Life has it – if you are alive you are intelligent – but if you never trust in it, it starts slowly, slowly disappearing from your life. If you don’t use your legs, you will lose the capacity to run. If you don’t use your eyes for three years and you remain with a blindfold, you will become blind. You can keep your senses alive only if you go on continuously using them.
Intelligence is a natural phenomenon, every child is born intelligent. Very few people live intelligently, and very few people die intelligently. Ninety-nine point nine percent of people remain stupid their whole life – and they were not unintelligent in the beginning. So what happens? They never use their intelligence. When they are small children they trust their parents and their guidance.
In a better world the parents, if they really love their children, will teach them to trust their own intelligence. In a better world the parents will help the children to be independent as soon as possible, to be on their own.
Then they have to trust the teachers in the school, then the professors in the college and in the university. By the time one third of their life is gone, they come out of the university utterly stupid. One-third of their life they have been taught to trust somebody else; that’s how their intelligence has been prevented from functioning.
Look at small children, how intelligent they are, how alive, how fresh, how tremendously ready to learn. And look at older people, dull, insipid, not ready to learn a thing, clinging to all that they know, clinging to the known, never ready to go on any adventure.
In a better world children will be thrown upon themselves as fast as possible; the whole effort of the parents should be to make the child use his intelligence. And the whole effort, if the education is right – if it is education and not miseducation – will be to throw the child again and again to his own intelligence, so that he can function, so that he can use his intelligence. He may not be so efficient in the beginning, that is true – the teacher may have the right answer and if the student has to work out his own answer, the answer may not be so right – but that is not the point at all. The answer may not be so right, it may not correspond to the answers given in the books, but it will be intelligent. And that is the real crux of the matter.

A teacher told his students, “Make some pictures, paint something about Jesus,” and the children painted. The teacher had been talking about Jesus, it was a Christian Sunday school.
One child painted an airplane – it was a very haphazard effort, it only possibly looked like an airplane – and it had four windows.
The teacher was intrigued. He asked, “Who are these people looking from the windows?”
The child said, “One is God the Father, the other is Jesus Christ the Son, and the third is the Holy Ghost.”
Certainly the teacher was even more curious. “And who is this fourth?” Three are okay, but who is this fourth?
And the child said, “He is Pontius the Pilot.”

The question may not be answered rightly – that is not the point – but look at the intelligence. Now, the teacher would have never found it on his own: “Who is the fourth?” Only a child can have such an intelligence, so fresh. Who bothers about your trinity? Just see the child and his intelligence.
Watch children and you will be constantly surprised. But we start destroying their intelligence because we are just too concerned with the right answer – not the intelligent answer, but the right answer. That is a wrong concern. Let the answer be intelligent, let the answer be a little bit original, let the answer be the child’s own. Don’t be bothered about right, don’t be in such a hurry; the right will come on its own. Let the child search for it, let him stumble upon it on his own.
Why are we in such a hurry? We simply drop the growth of the child’s intelligence, we supply the right answer. Just think: the whole process is that the child is never allowed to find the answer himself. We give him the answer. When the answer is given from the outside, intelligence need not grow – because intelligence only grows when it has to find the answer itself.
But we are so obsessed with the idea of right. No wrong should ever be committed. Why not? And the person who never commits any wrong never grows. Growth needs that you should go astray sometimes, that you should start playing around, fooling around, that you should find original things – they may be wrong – and you should come to the right by your own efforts, by your own growth. Then there is intelligence.
To be simple means to be intelligent. Simplicity is intelligence, living without ideals, without guides, without maps, just living moment to moment without any security.
Our concern with the right and our fear of the wrong is nothing but our fear of the insecure. The right makes us secure, the wrong makes us insecure, but life is insecurity. There is no security anywhere. You may have a bank balance, but the bank can go bankrupt any day. You may have the security of having a husband or a wife, but the wife can leave you any moment. She can fall in love, or the husband may die.
Life is insecure. Security is only an illusion that we create around ourselves, a cozy illusion. And because of this cozy illusion we kill our intelligence. The man who wants to live simply will have to live in insecurity, will have to accept the fact that nothing is secure and certain, that we are on an unknown journey, that nobody can be certain where we are going and nobody can be certain from where we are coming.
In fact, except for stupid people nobody has illusions of certainty. The more intelligent you are, the more uncertain you are. The more intelligent you are, the more hesitant, because life is vast. Life is immense, immeasurable, mysterious. How can you be certain?
Living in uncertainty, living in insecurity, is simplicity. And that’s what I mean by sannyas: a life of insecurity, a life without ideals, without character, a life not rooted in the past, not motivated by the future. A life utterly herenow.

The second question:
Osho,
I am a very curious person. That's why I have come to you. What do you say about curiosity?
Curiosity is good, curiosity is beautiful, but don’t stop at it. It is a good beginning, but not the end because curiosity always remains lukewarm. It is intellectual gymnastics. It is good to be curious because that is how one starts the journey of inquiry into existence, but if one simply remains curious there will be no intensity in it. One can move from one curiosity to another; one will become a driftwood from one wave to another wave, never getting anchored anywhere.
Curiosity is good as a beginning, but then one has to become more passionate. One has to make life a quest, not only a curiosity.
What do I mean when I say you have to make your life a quest? Curiosity creates questions, but your life never becomes a quest. Questions are many, a quest is one. When a question becomes so important to you that you are ready to sacrifice your life for it, it is a quest. When a question has such importance, such significance that you can gamble, that you can stake all that you have, it becomes a quest.
Curiosity is good as a triggering point for a quest, but there are many people who simply remain curious their whole life. Their life is a waste. They are rolling stones, they never gather any moss. They remain childish, they never become mature. They ask a thousand and one questions, but they are not really interested in the answers. By the time one has answered them, they have prepared another question. In fact, when the master is answering the question, if the disciple is only a curious one, he is already thinking about other questions to ask. He is not listening to the answer at all. He is not interested in the answer, he has enjoyed asking the question.
And then your curiosity can get you hooked onto something utterly nonsensical. There are people who are curious as to who made the world. Now this is utter nonsense. Buddha said it so many times: “How is it going to affect your life? It is not going to deepen your meditation. It is not going to help you become enlightened. It is not going to give you freedom. It is not going to give you any light. Why are you concerned with who made the world?” Whether it was A or B or C, a Christian God, a Hindu God or a Mohammedan God, why does it matter to you? Even if it is decidedly known that A made the world, what are you going to do then? You will start asking something else; that question is finished.
But those questions are never finished – because those questions are utterly meaningless, absurd, so they are never finished. You can go on asking and asking and asking, and your whole life can become just a waste.
It’s good to be curious as a beginning, but don’t remain curious forever. You will need some more passion in order to grow. Curiosity is not enough to transform your life. It is superficial, shallow. You will have to create a longing to know truth, an immense, intense passion for truth. Because that needs courage – because risk is involved – people go on thinking about questions. That is their substitute for the quest.
And this is the difference between philosophy and religion: religion is a quest, philosophy is only curiosity. The philosopher is never transformed by whatever he finds. He remains the same. For example, if you meet Aristotle you will not find any impact of his philosophy in his life, no, nothing of it. He will be as devoid of his own philosophy as you are. He only thinks, he does not live it. But if you meet the Buddha, then whatever he says, he lives it. He says it only because he lives it, saying comes later on. Living comes first, living precedes it.
Make your life a quest. It is good that you have come here, but don’t go as you have come. Go with a passion, a fire in your heart. Otherwise curiosity can be dangerous too.
I have heard…

Sam Jones, the most inquisitive man in New Haven, was riding down a branch line from Storrs, when an Englishman came into the car with a crutch and only one leg. After a long pause in which he was consumed with growing curiosity, Sam began talking: “Guess you were in the army, stranger?” looking down at the leg.
“Oh, no, I have never been in the army.”
“Fought a duel somewhere, maybe?”
“No, sir, never fought a duel.”
“These streetcars are dangerous things,” hazarded Sam.
“I was never in a streetcar or railroad accident,” the Englishman expanded.
All of Sam’s leading questions got him nowhere. At last he asked outright just how the man had lost his leg.
“I will tell you,” said the Englishman, “on condition that you will promise not to ask me another question.”
“Very well, just tell me how you lost that leg and I won’t ask another question.”
The Englishman regarded him agreeably. “It was bit off,” he said.
“Bit off!” exclaimed Sam. “Well, I declare. I should like to know what on earth…”
“No, sir, not another question,” glared the Englishman. “Not one.”
Sam Jones reached New Haven with a sick headache. He died within a week, of unsatisfied curiosity.

Let your curiosity be transformed here. Let it become a flame in your being, a quest. You have come here philosophically. Go from here as a religious person.
Religion is the quest for truth. It wants to know it, and not on somebody else’s authority, not borrowed from scriptures. Religion wants to know it on one’s own, and to have that quality is one of the greatest blessings of life.
I create inquiry here, not an inquiry that can ever be satisfied by anybody else – even I cannot satisfy it. I simply give you a thirst, I make you more and more thirsty. One day that very thirst will take you into your innermost shrine. There truth waits for you. There godliness abides.

The third question:
Osho,
Shree Morarji Desai, Prime Minister of India, told a group of your sannyasins who met him at Surat the other day that he did not like your thinking, your philosophy of life, and your work. He also showed a strong dislike for our ashram and its activities. Osho, would you please comment?
Morarji Desai has the mind of a fascist. How does it matter whether he likes my philosophy of life or not? Who is he? By being the prime minister of this country, it does not mean that everybody has to agree with him, that only that which he likes can exist or has the right to exist. If he does not like my work, my activities, my philosophy of life, that is his problem. He should try to understand more. He should try to be a little more intelligent, a little more aware and meditative.
That does not mean that he has to prevent my work, but that’s what he is doing, trying to do. And the strange thing is, he has come to power in the name of democracy. What is democracy, then?
Democracy means everybody has the right to think in his own way, to live in his own way. Democracy means that the government will keep away from interfering in people’s freedom, that the government is not going to impose its own ideology on everybody.
What I am saying, what I am, has nothing to do with him or his government. But this is how it happens to every politician: when he is out of power he talks about democracy, when he is in power he becomes a fascist. Morarji Desai is another illustration of Lord Acton’s famous statement: Power corrupts, and absolute power corrupts absolutely. Just within one and a half years he has forgotten all about democracy. It always happens.
It is something strange that power changes people. My own observation is that power does not change them, in fact, but only exposes them. It brings whatever is real in their being to the surface. When a person is not in power, he cannot be fascist, he has to hide that trait. He cannot be arrogant, he has to create a facade around himself so nobody comes to know about it; otherwise he will never be able to get into power. Once he gets into power, there is no need. He is no longer afraid of the people, now he is in power. Now he can do whatever he always wanted to do but was not capable of doing.
Morarji Desai has been against me all along. The conflict has continued at least for fifteen years, but because he was not in power, he could not do a thing. Now he is in power, so the fascist in him surfaces.

A group of former schoolmates had a reunion and were talking about old times.
One of them, a great politician, said, “When I was a little boy, I wanted to be a pirate.”
“I am glad one of us has fulfilled his ambition,” said somebody.

Politics is the last shelter of the scoundrels. Why do people seek power? Somewhere deep down there is a great desire to dominate, that’s why they seek power. So naturally, when they have power, they want to dominate, they want to dominate each and every phenomenon that is happening.
My work is not political, not at all. Why should he be worried about my work? What I am doing is something psychological. It is none of his business, but the power wants to express itself. A deep desire has always been in him to prevent my work, but up to now he was not capable of doing it. Now he is capable of doing it, and he cannot resist the temptation.
Once, when I started criticizing Mahatma Gandhi, Morarji Desai wanted that my entry into his province, Gujarat, should be prevented – even my entry – but he could not do a thing about it. Now he is in power, and he has had this wound about me in his heart for fifteen years. But his dislike is not a criterion. If he dislikes, he is perfectly free to dislike. My own feeling is that he does not understand what I am doing here.
In the first place, I have no philosophy of life. All that I am teaching to my people is to live without a philosophy of life, to just live. I am teaching life, not a philosophy of life.
Secondly, I am not teaching any doctrine, any dogma. I am not teaching how to think. On the contrary, I am teaching my people how to be without thought, how not to be in the thinking, how to disappear from the world of thinking, how to be utterly silent so not even a single thought moves in your mind. When the screen of the mind is utterly empty, when the projector of thinking has stopped functioning, meditation arises. And meditation is the door to God.
I am not here teaching people how to think. This is not a school of philosophy. I am not trying to give you better minds. This is not a place to cultivate mind and knowledge, this is a place to drop all mind and all knowledge. This is a place where you learn how to be a no-mind. I teach no-mind.
So my feeling is that he does not understand a bit what is happening here. But he is a very prejudiced man and he thinks he knows. He thinks he knows all that is worth knowing. And all that he knows is just playing the games of politics and nothing else.
You say he said that: “…he did not like your thinking, your philosophy of life, and your work. He also showed a strong dislike for our ashram and its activities.” He is obsessed with me and with my ashram. Why should he have a strong dislike for me and for my ashram? He must be having great nightmares about me and my people. You must be doing Kundalini Meditation in his dreams, and Chaotic Meditation. This dislike shows that somewhere deep down there is a like. This enmity shows that somehow deep down he is interested. If you hate somebody so much, that is an indication that you are attracted, that you are magnetically pulled.
And I know there is a reason for that magnetic pull. He cannot come because of his arrogance, but the pull is there. His whole life he has tried to meditate and he has failed. Hence the attraction. He wants to meditate, but it is difficult for his egoistic pattern of life to come here as a disciple, to come to learn. It is difficult.
But the pull is there, and whenever you are attracted and something prevents you, attraction becomes repulsion. When love starts being blocked, it becomes hate. Hate is nothing but love doing shirshasana – love standing on its own head. He is immensely attracted; that’s why he goes on making statements about me, goes on criticizing me, without any understanding at all.
He also said somewhere, just a few days ago, that he is willing to appoint a commission to inquire into the activities of my ashram, of this commune. But he said, “That is not going to profit Osho and his work.” Now what kind of commission will it be if he has already decided that it is not going to profit the ashram? A commission means an open inquiry. If the decision has already been taken, if he has already concluded that it is not going to help my work, that it is going to harm my work, what kind of inquiry would it be?
That’s what he is doing with other people, with Indira Gandhi. He already decided, and then a commission was made. The commission only went through empty gestures; the conclusion had already been reached. The commission only had to make a show that justice was being done.
This is not the way of a democratic person. This is the way of a fascist. There is only one hope, that he is very old. It is good that he is not young; otherwise this country would suffer a very long time.
It is very difficult for Indians to be democratic because India has lived in a very fascist way down the centuries. The Hindu mind is fascist. The Hindu mind believes that Hindus are the purest people in the world; that they are the highest people of the world; that they are the most religious people of the world; that God has chosen them specially; that their country is not ordinary earth, it is divine land; that their scriptures are not ordinary scriptures like other scriptures of other religions – they have been written by God himself.
The Hindu mind is fascist, it is not religious, and the Hindu mind has lived with this attitude for at least five thousand years. It has crushed the downtrodden, the poor; they have not been treated as human beings. They are called untouchables – they cannot even be touched. Not only can they not be touched, the Hindu mind has not even tolerated their shadows to fall upon them. When an untouchable in the ancient days used to pass, he had to shout, “I am passing through this street. Please, move yourself away from me.” Otherwise who knows? If even his shadow touched you, you would have to take a bath, you would have to purify yourself. And naturally, if you had to take a bath, if unnecessarily you had to go back to the river and you had to do the whole ritual, prayer, etcetera, and then do your purification, you became annoyed.
Untouchables have even been killed just because their shadow has touched a brahmin, the highest Hindu caste. And even today they are being killed. Since Morarji Desai has come to power, in this one-and-a-half years, more untouchables have been killed than ever in the thirty years’ history of Indian freedom. Their houses are being burned, right now, to this day, the twentieth century. People are treated like cattle – not even like cattle, worse than that. People are treated as things. People are being burned and killed, their women are being raped for no other reason, just because they are untouchables.
And small things annoy the Hindu mind. If an untouchable wants to go into the temple he cannot. If he tries he will be killed. These are the people who think they are religious, and even the temple is not democratic. If an untouchable goes to the well, he is not allowed to draw water from the common well because the well will become impure. If an untouchable wants his children to be in the same school, it is difficult, and so on, so forth.
So, small things annoy the Hindu mind, they have been fascist all along. And Morarji Desai is a Hindu chauvinist.
Hindus have been against women down the ages. No other country has repressed women like this. The woman has been condemned as the door to hell. The woman is the source of all sins; the woman is the source of all degradation, immorality. The woman is the source of all that is bad in the world, all that is evil. She is the agent of evil.
Now, what kind of mind is this? And these people brag about their purity, their religiousness, their spirituality. Now, these are the things that are creating trouble about me in Morarji Desai’s mind. I respect woman as much as I respect man. To me, they are equal. And I condemn all those scriptures which have condemned women as the source of evil. Those scriptures are the source of evil!
To me, the brahmin and the untouchable are the same. I don’t believe in any castes. I don’t believe in any distinctions between people – black and white, Hindu and Mohammedan, Christian and Jew. And that is creating great turmoil in their minds. What am I doing? It seems blasphemous, it seems that I am betraying their tradition.
I am not betraying their tradition, I am simply destroying it! It needs to be burned, it needs to be thrown to the dogs, this whole tradition.
And then, the Hindus have been very much against life. Morarji Desai is a representative: he is life-negative. I am life-affirmative. My only sin is that I love life and that I teach my people to live intensely, totally, wholly.
But in a democracy nobody can prevent me. Otherwise why go on bragging that this country is the greatest democracy of the world? Your actions show just the opposite. But the Hindu mind is hypocritical, it says one thing and does another. Even the so-called greatest Hindus are hypocrites, their saying and doing are never the same. They have said that only God exists and all is illusion. And still, the untouchable is not an illusion. The distinction between the brahmin and the untouchable is real – and all is illusion, only God is real.
Even Shankara – the man who represents the essential Hindu teaching of God being the only reality and the world being illusory – even he was very angry one day when he took his bath in the Ganges in Varanasi. He was touched by an untouchable as he was coming up the steps. He started abusing the untouchable, and the untouchable said, “Sir, you have said that all is illusion, only God is true. Then why are you feeling so offended? One illusion has touched another illusion, and can there be a real touch between two illusions? The touch is also illusion. Why are you getting so annoyed? And if only God is real, and you say God is everywhere and all is God, am I not part of God? Only you are part of God? And if a God has touched a God, how can one God make another God impure?”
But this is how the Hindu mind has functioned. It talks of great things and it lives in a very opposite way. That has become its habit.

“Chandulal,” said a rich Hindu grocer in Ahmedabad to his assistant, “have you mixed the glucose with the syrup?”
“Yes, sir.”
“And sanded the sugar?”
“Yes, sir.”
“Dampened the lettuce and mushrooms?”
“Yes, sir.”
“And put water in the milk?”
“Yes, sir.”
“Then you may come in to prayers.”

This has been the way. Life is one thing – and Hindus live it as disgustingly as anybody else in the world – and philosophy is another. They are beautiful talkers, immensely articulate, very philosophical and logical, but that seems to have nothing to do with their quality of life.
With me they are all angry because I am not a hypocrite. I live the way I like to live. I say things that are in tune with my life. For example, I am not against life and its joys: that’s what I say, and that’s how I live. They would have loved me very much if I was living like a beggar on the surface, if I was standing naked on the road, and carrying a deep desire inside me to reach sooner or later to heaven and enjoy all the joys there.
And what joys are these so-called saints thinking to enjoy in heaven? The same joys they are renouncing here. They renounce love here, they renounce the woman here. And they are waiting for paradise where they will get beautiful women whose bodies are of gold; whose bodies don’t perspire and who never age, who remain stuck at the age of sixteen. They are waiting for heaven because there are trees – they are called kalpavrikshas, wish-fulfilling trees. You sit underneath the tree and any wish that arises in you is immediately fulfilled, immediately. Not a single instant passes between the wish and its fulfillment.
But here, live a pretentious life. Don’t enjoy, don’t love, renounce everything, and wait for eternal pleasures. Those people think they are renunciates? What kind of renunciation is that? They are simply living a double life. Their inner life remains that of desire, longing, lust, and their outer life remains that of an ascetic.
I am not an ascetic. I am living in paradise herenow. And I teach you also to live in paradise herenow: this very earth the paradise, this very body the buddha. I am not against life’s pleasures, they are beautiful. I am not against all that life can shower on you. Its beauties, its joys, its blessings have to be received gratefully. I am not in any way condemnatory of anything.
I am not a worshipper of poverty because poverty is the source of all sins. I would like the whole earth to become richer and richer, more and more affluent. I would like everybody to have all that technology can provide now. Nobody need live starved, beggarly, dirty.
This is possible now. Technology can make this earth better than any paradise that you have invented in your scriptures.
But the Indian mind is against all joys. And deep down, there is a great desire to have them too – which is natural. I am not saying that it should not be there inside you. I am saying you should not live against it. It is natural, it is God-given. Everyone wants to live a life of pleasure and not of pain. This is natural, and I don’t see that anything is wrong in it. Everybody would like to have a beautiful house surrounded by beautiful trees, and this is natural. The person who does not want it that way has something wrong in his head. He is neurotic.

Once a Hindu sannyasin came to see me. He saw all the beautiful trees and many flowers, and in the grounds where I was living I had a small pond, and there were lotus flowers.
He looked all around and he said, “Why all these trees? Why all these flowers? A man like you should live an ascetic life.” He was angry.

From where was this anger coming? He was living a neurotic life. To live with lotus flowers is beautiful, it is prayerful, it is meditative. Everybody should have a pond with lotus flowers.
But in India, people are even against flowers. Then they think they are great spiritualists, they think they are not hedonists. Their hedonism is only postponed, that’s all. And because of that postponement they live a double life.
I am teaching my people to live a single, unitary life. There is no need to postpone. Be natural. I want Buddha, Gautam the Buddha, and Zorba the Greek to come closer and closer, to become one. My sannyasin has to be “Zorba the Buddha.” Bring earth and heaven closer; let God and his world be joined together. Let your body and your soul be one, a song sung in togetherness, a dance where body and soul meet and merge.
I am a materialist-spiritualist. That is their trouble: they cannot conceive of it. They have always thought that materialism is something diametrically against – opposite to – spiritualism, and I am trying to bring them closer. In fact, that’s how it is. Your body is not opposed to your soul, otherwise why should they be together? And God is not opposed to the world, otherwise why should he create it?
There is tremendous harmony between the creator and his creation. In fact, when you attain the space in which I am, you will see the creator has become his creation, he is not separate at all. He has become the trees and the birds and the animals and the mountains and the rivers and the people. God has become his world.
This is my fundamental: I am in tremendous love with existence because it is God’s manifestation, in all its forms. There is nothing lower and nothing higher, all is one. And the “lower” and the “higher” have to be bridged – because, down the centuries, you have been taught that the lower is far away from the higher – so they have become unbridged. A gap has come into your being and that gap has to be bridged.
That’s my whole work here, and I can understand why Morarji strongly dislikes it. He is a traditionalist, an orthodox Hindu, with no vision, with no insight into life. He is just a fascist Hindu, and my approach toward life is that of individual freedom, utter freedom for the individual. The individual should not be interfered with unless he becomes dangerous to other people. Unless he starts interfering with other people’s freedom, he should not be interfered with. Each individual has to be himself and has to be given space enough to be himself. That the fascist mind cannot allow.
They have already decided against me. They have not come here, they have not seen what is happening here. Morarji is not ready to appoint a commission so that our people can explain to their so-called experts what is happening here, so they can have a more realistic approach. He is not willing to appoint a commission. He says if I go on insisting on a commission, he will appoint one, but he wants it not to be helpful in any way; it can even harm. Why? A commission has to be open.
I am not worried whether his commission harms or helps. We will have a good time, it will be fun. We will share a few jokes, that’s all. I am not worried whether his commission helps me or harms me. What can his commission do? But his commission may be helped. They may start thinking anew, it may be a blessing for them.
The politicians go on thinking that they are creating great order. That’s what Morarji Desai thinks, that he is creating great order in society, that I am dangerous, that I am creating disorder. I am not creating disorder. The society is in disorder. The society is already dying, it is rotten. You have become accustomed to its rottenness, that’s why you can’t see it. Just look around. What kind of society is this? Everybody is against everybody else, everybody is at each other’s throats. Everybody is jealous, violent, angry, full of hatred. Everybody is trying to dominate and kill the other in some way or other. And everybody is suicidal. Nobody seems to be dancing with joy, nobody seems to be in a state of celebration.
What more disorder can there be? The whole country is suffering from violence, hooliganism, murders; the whole country is in chaos. And these people think that I will destroy the order of the society.
I am trying to bring real order. Real order comes from within, it comes out of understanding. Real discipline is not that which is imposed from the outside.
That’s the difference between religion and the irreligious mind. The irreligious mind is always behavioristic. The irreligious mind is represented by Pavlov, Skinner, and people like that. The Skinnerian approach is that you change the behavior of the person and that will change his inner being. The religious approach is, you change his inner being and his behavior will follow. The outer is a shadow, it is not the center.
That’s what I am doing here. My work is utterly religious. It is against Skinner and the behaviorists. I don’t believe that you can change the person’s soul by changing his outer behavior. You can change his outer behavior and he can pretend, he can act – and deep down he will remain the same because the center remains unaffected by the circumference.
You can start being outwardly simple – you can drop your clothes, you can renounce your home – but sitting in a Himalayan cave, what will you think? How is your thinking going to be different? How will your mind be different just by moving from the house to the cave? The mind does not change so easily. And if the mind changes, you are alone even in the crowd, you are in meditation even in the marketplace.
I am trying to make people aware that change, real change, comes from within and spreads outward. But they are afraid that I may create chaos.

A surgeon, an architect, and a politician were arguing about which of their professions was the oldest.
“Mine is,” said the surgeon. “It began when God removed Adam’s rib to make Eve.”
“My profession is older,” said the architect. “It began when God created the world out of chaos.”
“Yes, “ said the politician, “but who created the chaos?”

Do Morarji Desai and company think I am going to create chaos? I am trying to bring order, real order. Their anger, their annoyance, is natural. If I am right, then they are wrong. And not only that they are wrong, but their whole tradition is wrong, their scriptures are wrong. They have lived up to now in illusions, without taking any note of reality.
I am bringing a new vision, a new religion into the world, a religion which is wide enough to contain the world and God together, a vision big enough to contain both the soul and the body. Up to now, the materialist was thought to be irreligious. He lived half, he lived the body part, and the spiritualist lived the other half, the soul part. Both were ugly because both were incomplete. Both had wounds because both needed the other to be whole and the other was missing. Both were unbalanced, both were neurotic.
Man can become sane only when man becomes whole. How to make man a perfect circle, a wholeness? The only way is to bring materialism and spiritualism closer and closer – so close that their boundaries disappear, that matter becomes divine, that God becomes matter. Only in that state will man be able to be sane.
When traveling all over the country, while I was preparing for you people, I was studying all kinds of people, neurotic, psychotic – all kinds of people, spiritualists, materialists. Once I saw Morarji Desai too, just to see this kind of neurosis, to watch, to observe what kind of neurosis creates a politician. And watching him, I was so perfectly satisfied that I never went to see any other politician. Enough was enough.
If I am right, they will have to drop many vested interests, and that is difficult. They would rather like to forget all about me. But I am not going to leave them so easily. I am going to insist, I am going to hammer the truth again and again.
This time, something is bound to happen. The world is ready, it has prepared for many centuries for this revolution to happen. It has become tired of materialists, it has become tired of spiritualists. It needs a new vision. And this new vision is going to be against both. The spiritualist, the old spiritualist, is going to be against me. And you will be surprised; the old materialist is also going to be against me.
Just the other day I was reading an article against me by Khwaja Ahmed Abbas. He is a communist, a materialist. Now, Morarji Desai and Khwaja Ahmed Abbas are strange bedfellows! Morarji Desai thinks he is a spiritualist. Khwaja Ahmed Abbas thinks he is a communist, a materialist, a Marxist. Both are against me. How can they both be against me? They can both be against me because the spiritualist will feel that I am betraying spiritualism by bringing materialism in, and the materialist will feel that I am betraying materialist philosophy by bringing spiritualism in.
So you have to be aware of the fact that I will have more enemies than Jesus had, I will have more enemies than Buddha had. But I will also have more friends than Jesus had, and I will also have more friends than Buddha had. And this time the division will be such that all the neurotic people, spiritualist, materialist, will be against me – and all the sane people and people who would like the world to become sane will be with me.
Enough for today.