---
title: The Great Pilgrimage 01
series: The Great Pilgrimage 01-28
talk_number: 1
url: https://oshoworld.com/the-great-pilgrimage-01
language: English
duration: 02:25:46
author: RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS
scraped_at: 2026-01-03T09:28:03.914967+00:00
---
Osho,
Why am I such a beggar for attention? What can I do about it?
It is one of the human weaknesses, one of the deep-rooted frailties, to seek attention.
The reason one seeks attention is because one does not know oneself. It is only in other people’s eyes one can see his face, in their opinions he can find his personality. What they say matters immensely. If they neglect him, ignore him, he feels lost. If you pass by and nobody takes any attention, you will start losing what you have put together – your personality. It is something that you have put together. You have not discovered it, it is not natural. It is very artificial and very arbitrary.
It is not only you who is a beggar for attention; almost everybody is. And the situation cannot change until you discover your authentic self – which does not depend on anybody’s opinion, attention, criticism, indifference, which does not have anything to do with anybody else. Because very few people have been able to discover their reality, the whole world is full of beggars.
Deep down you are all trying to find attention; it is nourishment for your personality. Even if people condemn you, criticize you, are against you, that is acceptable, at least they are paying attention to you; if they are friendly, respectful, of course that is far better, but you cannot survive as a personality without some kind of attention. It can be negative, it can be positive, it doesn’t matter. People must say something about you; respectful or disrespectful, both fulfill the same purpose.
I would like you to think about the word respect. It does not mean honor, as it is said in all the dictionaries without exception. Respect simply means looking again, re-spect. When you are passing by on the road, somebody looks back again, you have caught his eye – you are somebody. Because respect gives you the idea of being somebody special, you can do anything stupid just to get attention.
In all the ages people have tried in a thousand and one ways to get attention. Those ways are not necessarily rational – for example, the punks in the West. What are they really wanting by cutting their hair in strange and weird ways, and then painting it with different psychedelic colors? What are they wanting? They are beggars. You should not be angry with them because that is what they want. You should not condemn them because that is what they want. Their parents should not criticize them because that is what they want. They cannot survive without people paying attention to them.
People have done all kinds of things you may not believe in the past. People have remained naked…. What was the need for Mahavira or Diogenes to be naked? It is no longer natural for man to be naked in all the seasons; he lost that capacity long ago. All animals are naked, but they have a natural immunity. When it is winter their hair grows, when it is hot summer their hair falls. Nature has given them a protection.
The same protection was available to man too, but man is intelligent and can improve on nature. He found ways to cover his body according to the seasons. Naturally his body lost the natural growth of hairs. Now, to be naked…suddenly your body cannot create the mechanism to protect you.
I know Mahavira or Diogenes are unique individuals, but I think they were a little uncertain of their uniqueness. They fulfilled that suspicion, that missing gap, by being naked, because you cannot avoid giving attention to a naked person in a world where everybody is wearing clothes. The naked person stands aloof. You cannot avoid…it is almost irresistible to look at him, to ask, “What is the matter?”
But their nakedness became something spiritual; people started being respectful just because they were naked. Now, nakedness is not a quality or any qualification or any creativity; all the animals, all the birds, all the trees are naked.
There are still Jaina monks in India, not more than twenty. They used to be in thousands, but now to find that many stupid people is a little difficult. One Jaina monk dies and is not replaced, so their number goes on falling. Only twenty people all over India are still naked – and I have seen many of them; they don’t show any sign of intelligence, they don’t show any quality of silence, they don’t show any joy. Their faces are sad, dull, sleepy. They are suffering, they are torturing themselves, just for the simple reason that it brings the attention of the people.
Anything, howsoever stupid, is possible for man if it can bring attention to him.

In Russia before the revolution there was a Christian sect which used to cut their genitals publicly on a particular day each year – and they had thousands of followers. Their only qualification for being spiritual was that they had cut their genitals. When the day arrived, they would gather in a church courtyard and they would cut their genitals and pile them up. And thousands of people would come to see this stupidity.
The women were not left behind…of course they were in a difficulty because they don’t have hanging genitals to cut; their genitals are inwards. They started cutting their breasts – they were not ready to be left behind. It was such a messy and bloody affair, but people were touching their feet, worshipping them, and all that they have done is just an ugly act against nature and against themselves.

What is significant if a man goes on a fast? Mahatma Gandhi used the strategy his whole life: It was nothing but catching the attention of the whole nation. And if he was going to fast unto death, the whole world’s attention was immediately caught. Otherwise there is no spirituality in fasting: millions die starving. Millions are going to die in the coming ten, twelve years from starvation. Nobody will give any honor or respect to them. Why? Because their starvation is inevitable. They are not starving willfully but because they don’t have food; they are simply poor and starving people.
But Mahatma Gandhi had everything available to him, although he lived like a poor man. One of his intimate followers, a very intelligent woman, Sarojini Naidu – has a statement on record that to keep Mahatma Gandhi poor they had to spend treasures on him. It was not a simple poverty, it was a managed show.
He would not drink the milk from a buffalo because it is rich, rich with vitamin A and other vitamins. He would not drink the milk of a cow because that too is rich, and poor people cannot afford it. He would drink only the milk of a goat, because that is the cheapest animal and poor people can afford it. But you will be surprised: his goat was being washed twice a day with Lux toilet soap! His goat’s food consisted of the richest nourishment that any rich man may feel jealous of. It is such an insane world! The goat was given the milk of a cow to drink. Cashew nuts, apples and other nourishing fruits were her only food; she was not living on grass. Her daily food in those old days cost ten rupees per day; that ten rupees per day in those days was enough for a man to live for a whole month.
And Gandhi was traveling third class. Naturally, he was attracting attention – a great man is traveling third class! But nobody saw that the third class compartment, which could have carried sixty people at least, was carrying only a single man; it is far more costly than the air-conditioned compartment. But it attracted attention.
He started using clothes just like the farmers of India – they are eighty percent of the people in the country. Because he was using farmer’s clothes – the upper body is naked, only the lower body has a small piece of cloth to wrap around – the poor people of this country became immensely respectful and started calling him Mahatma, the great soul.
But I have been looking into his life as deeply as possible. I don’t find any great soul; I have not found even a little soul – just pure politics in the name of religion. Knowing perfectly well that India can be impressed only by religion, he was doing devotional songs every day in the morning and in the evening, but it was all to attract attention.
Attention gives you tremendous nourishment for the ego. And there are instances…his secretary – private secretary, Mahadeo Desai – has written a whole diary of the many years that he spent with Mahatma Gandhi as his secretary. Many times there are mentions about J. Krishnamurti, with such sarcastic remarks that one cannot believe that Mahatma Gandhi had any insight into meditation or awareness: otherwise he cannot be sarcastic.
You can criticize, but criticism needs understanding. You can say Krishnamurti is not right, but then you have to give evidence – on what grounds? But just to laugh and giggle when Krishnamurti’s name was mentioned…Krishnamurti was saying, “I am the awakened one; you also have the capacity to be an awakened one,” and that was making Mahatma Gandhi laugh sarcastically.
Meher Baba, another man of the same caliber as J. Krishnamurti, gave a telegram to Mahatma Gandhi saying, “You have been in search of God, you have written your autobiography and titled it Experiments with Truth, but you don’t know anything of meditation, of silence. If you are really interested I can come to you and I can make you aware of the dimension of meditation.” And the whole gang that was around Mahatma Gandhi laughed – “This fellow thinks that he is God himself.” And Mahatma Gandhi replied, “I will do my own search; you need not trouble to come here.”
A third time it happened. One man of the name Kedarnath was of the same caliber as J. Krishnamurti, but was not world known. He was not a man of words but a man of silence, peace. He stayed in Mahatma Gandhi’s ashram, and soon the pendulum started moving towards him. The disciples of Mahatma Gandhi by and by started deserting him. In his morning devotional songs, the number of people was declining: they were going to sit in silence with Kedernath.
Finally it became such a situation: the ashram was Mahatma Gandhi’s, Kedarnath was just a guest, but he captured almost all Gandhi’s disciples. Gandhi was left alone, but his ego would not allow him to go and sit where all his disciples were sitting – in silence with Kedarnath. It was with great humanity and compassion that Kedarnath left the ashram in the middle of the night just to avoid a clash, because now it was becoming clear that Mahatma Gandhi had lost control of his own disciples. Kedarnath did not want to create any conflict.
Sri Aurobindo had a certain clarity. He was not an enlightened man of the category of J. Krishnamurti or Meher Baba, but he was very close. Perhaps one life more and he will be enlightened; he was just on the border line. He declared, “India will become free, will attain freedom on my birthday” – and it actually happened. The fifteenth of August is Sri Aurobindo’s birthday, and he had declared it thirty years before. People had completely forgotten about his declaration, but India became free on the fifteenth of August.
Sri Aurobindo sent a message to Mahatma Gandhi, “Now that the country is free, you need a complete program for its progress, because it is one thing to fight for freedom and it is another thing after attaining the freedom to create a nation; tremendous responsibility falls on your shoulders.”
And the reply that Mahatma Gandhi gave was again simply sarcastic: “You have left the world; you live in your ashram. You don’t have to worry about what happens to freedom and what we are going to do; that is our business. You have left it, you don’t have to interfere.”
Now a man like Sri Aurobindo could have given insight, but that insight was not accepted – and it shows. In those forty years that have passed since freedom, India has become worse every day. It has no program; its population has doubled, more than doubled. Its poverty has doubled – the poverty grows according to the population. By the end of this century, India will be for the first time in the whole history of mankind, of millions of years, the most densely populated country. Up to now, China has been the first. So only one achievement seems to have come out of forty years of freedom: people have produced more and more children.
By the end of this century, just thirteen years away, India will have one billion people in the country. When it became free it had only four hundred million people. It seems that each year there is an increase of one million people – but no technology is growing, no science is growing, no new methods are being used. And this population growth goes on making the country poorer and poorer. India is living on loans from the rich countries like America, and that is a new kind of slavery, economic slavery.
The days of political slavery are past, because it was unnecessary…. It is a similar case: the days of slaves are past, and the days of servants have come in because the slave was a great responsibility to the slave owner. He had to take care of the slave’s health, he had to take care of his body, food, clothes, his medicine, because he was an investment. He has purchased the man, and if he dies his whole investment is gone.
Slavery disappeared not because slaves revolted against it; there is no instance of slaves revolting. Slavery died because the people who were enslaving other people found better ways – servants. You are not purchased; hence it is not an investment. If you die, you die; it is not a loss to the owner. He pays you, but he has no concern for your body, for your health, for your family. This was far better.
The same has happened in the world of freedom. The British Empire disappeared, all other empires have disappeared, because political slavery became costly, very costly. It was the responsibility of the rulers to feed people, at least.
The moment Britain saw that India is growing so fast in population that it will be impossible to feed the people, and the whole responsibility will be on the head of Britain, Atlee sent to Mountbatten an urgent message: “You finish the whole thing before 1948, and if you can do it earlier I will praise you. Whatever way has to be found, be quick, and let them be free. Because then the whole responsibility will be on their own heads. They cannot complain, ‘Britain is exploiting us; that’s why we are poor.’”
Now nobody is exploiting you, and your poverty has grown much greater than it has ever been under slavery.
Politicians can pretend to be religious if religion is attractive. Because they need attention their whole personality is false. It depends on how many people are following them; it depends on the number of people who are attentive to them. It is a politics of numbers.
The Catholic pope is against birth control, against abortion, not because he is compassionate, saying, “This is absolute cruelty and violence,” not because he is life-affirmative – the whole Catholic attitude is life-negative, it is against life. Then why this insistence that there should be no birth control and no abortion? Because this is the only way to increase the number of Catholics, and this is the only way to make other people so poor that they have to come under the fold of the Catholic empire.
Now that there are so many orphans in India, Catholics have a good opportunity. And one wonders…a woman like Mother Teresa is awarded a Nobel prize, is awarded many doctorates in India by Indian universities, is awarded prizes by the Indian government, all because she is taking care of orphans. But nobody thinks that that care simply means converting those orphans into Catholics. Naturally Mother Teresa cannot be in favor of birth control – from where will she get the orphans?
Christianity cannot be in favor of a world which is rich. The scientists are declaring continually that we have come to such a point of technological progress that now there is no need for anybody to be hungry, to be starving or dying because of shortage of food. It has never before been possible, but now scientists are saying that we can feed five billion people very easily, we can feed even more – but those voices are silenced. No politician pays any attention, because politicians are also interested in having a big following.
In India Mohammedans will not be ready to accept that you should not marry four women…which is simply a human matter. But they have made it a point that it is a religious matter. I cannot understand how it is religious to marry four women. And if it is religious to marry four, then it will be doubly religious to marry eight. Perhaps that’s why Mohammed himself married nine women. The reality is that four women can produce four children in the year; vice-versa will not help. One woman marrying four men will still produce one child, not four children. But one man marrying a number of women can produce more children.
You will be surprised to know that India has already been divided in the name of religion, and Mohammedans have taken Pakistan on one side, and Bangladesh on another side; the country has been cut into three parts. Now again Mohammedans are growing so much that India is the greatest Mohammedan country in the world. No Mohammedan country has so many Mohammedans as India has. Any day they can start demanding a separate country, because they are second in number to Hindus, and Hindus are not a converting religion. Mohammedans are a converting religion, forcibly too. There is no need of any argument; the sword is the argument!
Your so-called religious leaders, your so-called political leaders, all need attention, all need their names and their photos continually in the newspapers, because if newspapers forget anybody’s name for a few months, people forget that man also. Now what do you know about Richard Nixon? Where is that poor fellow? One day he was the greatest, most powerful man on the earth, and now you will only hear about him the day he dies, and that too will be on the third, fourth page of the newspapers in a small column. What happens to these powerful people? When they lose people’s attention, their personality starts disappearing.
I have known many political leaders in this country. Perhaps this country has more ex-ministers, chief ministers, governors than any other country. Once they become “ex” they are finished. Then nobody pays any attention to them, nobody asks them to inaugurate bridges, railway lines, hospitals, schools. No paper even bothers where they are, whether they are alive or dead. And there was a time when they were in the newspapers every day, on the radios, on television.

One of my sannyasins works in the Indian television. She wanted to bring a small piece from my talks every day to the television. The director said, “We can accept the material, but we cannot mention Osho’s name.”
She said, “But this is absolutely illegal, and it is stealing.”
But the director said, “You should not mention his name at all” – because that’s what the Indian politicians want, and that’s what the politicians of the whole world want.
The Attorney General of America has emphatically declared in a press conference, “Our whole effort will be to silence Osho’s voice completely.”
One reporter asked, “What does it mean? Do you want to assassinate him?”
And the Attorney General laughed. He said, “No, we will find some roundabout ways so he is not heard any more.”
The American government is pressurizing the Indian government so that no foreign news media will be allowed to reach me. And I am receiving letters from Germany, from America, from Greece, from England, from Australia, “What is the matter? Why is the Indian government absolutely stubborn that they don’t want any news media, newspapers, radio, or television people to come to Pune?”

This is the way, in their eyes, to silence me. They are wrong. I have my own ways: I have my own people who are enough…just person to person. If a man like Gautam Buddha, without any television, without any newspapers, without any radio, could convert the whole of Asia, what is the problem? I am not dependent on their news media.
But the fear of the politicians is…the whole media attention should be focused on them – and why are people asking to go to Pune? Why don’t they ask to come to Delhi? That hurts them very badly.
It is not only your problem, that you are a beggar for attention; it is a human reality. And the reason is that you depend on your personality – which is false, which has been created by the society, and which can be taken away by society. Don’t depend on it. It is not in your power.
That which is in your power is your own individuality. Discover it! And the name of the science to discover it is meditation.
Once you know yourself, you don’t care about others. Even if the whole world forgets you it does not matter, it does not even make the slightest difference to you; or the whole world can know – that too does not give you any ego. You know ego is false, and to depend on the false is to make houses on the sand, without foundation. Your personalities are almost signatures on water. You have not even signed, and they disappear.

A group of Jewish mothers were drinking coffee together, and bragging about their children. One had a four-year-old who could read already. Another had a five-year-old who had already appeared on television. Then Becky Goldberg spoke up and said, “That’s nothing. You should see my little Hymie. He is only five years old, but the other day he went to the psychiatrist all by himself!”

A middle-aged woman confessed to her priest that she was becoming vain.
“Why do you think so?” asked the priest.
“Because,” replied the woman, “every time I look in the mirror I am inspired by my beauty.”
“Don’t worry,” said the priest, “that’s not a sin, that’s only a mistake!”

It was a big meeting of the medical society in honor of an ear specialist who was retiring after more than fifty years of service. As a gift, they presented him with a golden ear. He stood up to make a speech, and after the applause had died down, he looked at his gift and said, “Thank God I was not a gynecologist!”

Don’t depend on others!
Be independent in your being.
Just listen to your inner voice.
You can listen the moment you start being still and silencing your mind – and it is not difficult. And when I say it is not difficult, I say it with absolute authority: It is not difficult! If it has happened to me, it can happen to you – there is no difference. All human beings are potentially capable to know themselves. And the moment you know yourself, then nobody can take away your individuality. Even if they kill you, they can only kill your body, not you.
When Socrates was poisoned, the chief judge said to him, “I feel sorry that I had to agree with the majority. They all wanted to kill you. And you are such a strange fellow…I gave you three alternatives, but you did not accept.”
The chief judge had tremendous respect, but what to do? The majority was shouting, “He should be killed because he is corrupting our youth. He is giving them ideas which are against our tradition, against our religion. He is making them skeptical of the old and the ancient. He is making them explore the reality on their own, and not just believe in knowledge and ancient scriptures. He is destroying our tradition. We don’t want this man; this man should be destroyed.”
But the chief judge understood the whole situation. He said to Socrates…because in those days in Greece there were city states; Athens was a city state and the Athenian law was not applicable outside Athens. So he said, “The first simple choice is, you just move out of Athens, just outside the boundary line, and there you can make your school, your academy. Those who want to learn will come there.”
Socrates said, “That will show my fear of death…and some day I am going to die, I am old enough. These people are too impatient; I will die by myself. So to escape from Athens just for a few years…my being does not support such an idea. I cannot act out of fear. I would rather accept death, because you can only kill my body but not my spirit. And the body is going to die anyway, any moment!”
The chief judge said, “The second alternative is if you promise not to talk about truth, to stop teaching, you can live in Athens.”
He said, “Then what will be the point of living? To me, truth is higher than life. Life comes and goes; truth remains. No, I cannot accept that.”
The chief judge said, “Then the last thing is that you can say, ‘I am sorry that I have hurt people’s feelings.’ Just a simple apology will make me stand in your favor, and you can be saved from this ugly act of poisoning you to death.”
Socrates said, “That is not possible, because I have not done anything wrong. I cannot say I am sorry. I can only say I am immensely happy, and the question of an apology does not arise. For centuries you all will be condemned because you poisoned me. And one thing I would like you to know is that your name will be remembered only because you gave the judgment for my death; otherwise, nobody will remember you.”
This is the man of individuality, who does not care for his life, for his body, who has no fear. He accepted death with joy.
An individual is the only person who can get rid of this state of begging; otherwise you are going to remain a beggar your whole life. And in subtle ways you are continuously begging. Every young man falling in love with a woman will ask the woman, “Am I the first man you have fallen in love with?” It is almost inevitable. And every woman will ask, “Am I the first woman you have fallen in love with?” Why such questions? The woman wants you never to have paid attention to anybody: “I am the first, the most beautiful woman in your eyes.”
Man all through history has insisted that he will marry only a virgin – for what? It is such a stupid idea, because a virgin is absolutely inexperienced. You should insist, “I should marry someone who has some experience.” This is simple, logical, rational and scientific. But all the societies have insisted that they will accept in marriage only a virgin girl.
In the middle ages there were doctors in Europe…because the woman’s virginity can be judged, checked. There is a very thin layer of skin – if she has not been in a sexual relationship, that skin remains intact; if she has been in a sexual relationship, that skin is broken. That broken skin proves that she is not a virgin. Now sometimes it can be broken just by riding on a bicycle, it can be broken by riding on a horse, it can be broken by any accident – falling from the staircase. It is not something that can be broken only by making love. But every young man was alert on his first night as to whether the woman was virgin or not, so there were doctors in Europe who used to fix a false skin to make anybody virgin! Their profession was flourishing greatly.
I was in Greece, and I asked one of my sannyasins, “In Greece is virginity immensely valued by the orthodox church of Greece?” And the sannyasin I was asking had been one of the most beautiful women, one time chosen as Miss Greece.
She laughed. She said, “The church goes on saying that virginity is our fundamental principle, but it is very difficult to find a virgin in Greece!” But before getting married, they become virgin. It is just a very small thing for a gynecologist to fix a thin layer of skin.

I have heard one priest was asking and thundering and threatening the people of his congregation, “If you are not virgin, you will suffer hellfire. So all women who are virgin, or who have been virgin before their marriage, stand up!” Nobody stood up. He said, “I say again…” One woman with a little baby stood up. He said, “I am happy at least one woman has followed the religious principle of the Greek orthodox church.”
The woman said, “Forgive me Father, I am not standing for myself; I am standing for the baby. You cannot expect a six-month-old baby to stand by herself! She is certainly a virgin, I can guarantee it!”

All kinds of stupid notions have prevailed in humanity. And you have to follow these notions if you want attention. In India, if you want to have attention…There was a man in Mahatma Gandhi’s ashram, and he was an intelligent man. He had been a professor, a retired professor, Professor Ranga. He lived for six months only on cow dung and cow urine – just these two things for six months – and he became more of an attraction than Mahatma Gandhi himself. Everybody who was coming to the ashram was going to see Professor Ranga. Even Mahatma Gandhi called him a great man, a great spiritual man! I don’t see how cow dung can make a man spiritual. It simply can prove that he is stupid. But in Hindu society where the cow is accepted as the mother, the holy mother, this is a great spiritual attainment.
All over the world you will find the same kind of superstitions in different ways. And if you want the attention of people, you have to follow their ideas. You have always to be a follower, you have always to be a believer, you have always to be stupid and idiotic.
But if you want to get rid of this begging, you will have to get rid of your ego and your personality. You will have to learn that there is nothing in respect, there is nothing in reputation, there is nothing in respectability. They are all bogus words, meaningless, contentless. The reality belongs to you, but unless you discover it, you will have to depend on others.
You are emperors, but you have to discover yourself.
And this discovery is not difficult:
Your kingdom is within you.
You just have to learn to close your eyes and look inwards. A little discipline, a little learning not to remain focused on the outside continuously, but to turn inwards at least once or twice a day, whenever you can find time…slowly, slowly you start becoming aware of your eternal being. Then the idea of attention simply disappears.
And the miracle is: the day you don’t need anybody’s attention, people start feeling your charisma, because charisma is the radiation of your individuality. They start feeling that you are somebody special, unique – although they cannot pinpoint where your uniqueness is, what it is that attracts like a magnet.
People who have discovered themselves have found thousands of people attracted towards them, but they are not asking for it.

Osho,
How can hypnosis and meditation come together?
Hypnosis has been condemned by all kinds of ignorant people. They don’t understand anything about it, but you will find people everywhere condemning it. The word is used without knowing even the meaning of it. People will say to you, “You are hypnotized, that’s why you go to Osho!” But just ask them what hypnosis is. They cannot even tell you the literal meaning of it, nor can they tell you what is the technique of it. Just the word is enough to condemn anybody, “You are hypnotized.”
Hypnosis is a tremendously beautiful art, and there is nothing wrong in it. But everything can be used in a wrong way or in a right way. You can have a sword and cut somebody’s head. That is not the fault of the sword; the sword is neutral. With your sword you can prevent somebody from raping a woman. But the sword is absolutely neutral, neither good nor bad; every energy is neutral.
Hypnosis is a tremendous source of energy. The word itself means deliberate sleep. You know ordinary sleep, you sleep every day; because it is ordinary sleep, it does not go deep enough. Its function is to help your body to recover its energy lost in the day-to-day work, so tomorrow morning you can get up fresh, again able to work. The ordinary sleep only goes so deep that it can help your body to recover, rejuvenate.
Deliberate sleep is the meaning of hypnosis. It is a simple thing, but it goes as deep as you are ready to go. It refreshes your body, it silences your mind, it cleanses your heart, it can reach to your very being. It all depends on your willingness – nobody can hypnotize you against your will. That also is a greatly fallacious idea prevalent in the world, that somebody can hypnotize you against your will. That is impossible. Nobody can hypnotize you against your will.
Simple methods are used by the hypnotist. He will tell you to relax and concentrate on something shiny, without moving your eyelids; just keep your eyes open as long as you can, and only when it is almost impossible for you, when the eyelids close by themselves – you cannot do anything, you cannot stop – only then…You are relaxed, lying down in a silent place, looking at a very strong light which tires the eyes, staring at it. The hypnotist is repeating, “Your eyelids are becoming very heavy, the light is too strong and you are going to fall asleep soon.” And he will go on repeating it.
It takes not more than three to five minutes before you will start feeling your eyelids have become heavier, and heavier, and heavier. And a moment comes when you cannot keep them open, they simply close. Then the hypnotist starts telling you, “You are going deeper, deeper. And you will hear only my voice and nothing else.” Your total willingness is needed. If you are reluctant, if you don’t want it, then the hypnotist is absolutely helpless. It is not a power of the hypnotist as it is understood in the world, it is the willingness of the hypnotized that brings that deep kind of deliberate sleep.
If you follow, cooperate with the hypnotist, he can take you deeper, deeper, deeper…the mind has become silent. And the moment he says anything, it simply sinks into your being. Your heart is dancing with harmony – no tension, no thought. You have entered into the innermost shrine of your being; now relax there.
But this is possible only, and I am saying categorically only, if you are willing to go into it. But it is tremendously helpful, because you find it very difficult on your own to go into that deep silence where the world is left far behind. And if the hypnosis is going to be used for meditative purposes…It can be used for many kinds of purposes, it can be used for healing.
Seventy percent of your diseases are just mind diseases, they are not really there. You simply believe they are there, and because you believe, they are there. It is because of this there are so many “pathies”: allopathy, homeopathy, naturopathy, ayurveda, unani. There are so many “pathies,” Chinese, Japanese…and all function perfectly well, but only for seventy percent.
Only allopathy is a scientific methodology; it functions on one hundred percent of your diseases. But every pathy…homeopathy is nothing but sugar pills, but it works, and the work is not small – seventy percent. For seventy percent of sicknesses it is perfectly good. Naturopathy works, and naturopathy is very simple, for example, having a mud bath. Fill your bathtub with mud and lie down in the mud, and it cures many things. It has been found that seventy percent of diseases are in your own hands.
I had a doctor who was a fake doctor. He was my friend. He had no degrees, but his board was full of degrees – all kinds of degrees, from inside India, from outside India. And he made a lab. As you entered into his clinic, first you would pass through a tremendous lab, which was all just bogus – great machines that you have never seen, which have nothing to do with medicine – and he would impress you in this way.
When you reached his office you would be surprised. He never used an ordinary stethoscope; he had a very special arrangement. He was a genius although he was a fake. But he was a genius! You would have to lie down on the table, and above your head there were many big bottles with colored water, joined with a tube. That tube he would attach to the stethoscope, and the water would jump. You would see the water jumping – whether red water is jumping or green water is jumping. You have never seen such a thing!
It created great trust in the man: “That man is not ordinary.” And he was just watching the water…! That could have been done by anybody, by an ordinary stethoscope; it was nothing…your heart is jumping, so the water is jumping. Everything was special! He had almost cured the person by the time he was out of his clinic, and he was simply giving water, colored water, to people.
He was caught by the police. As I heard that he had been caught, I went immediately to the police station and I told those people, “He is fake, but he has helped hundreds of people – you should also consider that. It is absolutely unjust to harass him. It is true that those degrees are false, but those degrees are not given by any university, any medical college; so what is wrong if he has used the alphabet and he has made his degrees himself? Your concern should be how many people he has helped. And those are the people whom nobody could help.”
People used to go to him only as a last resort, because his fees were very high. Naturally, he had such a great establishment, his fees were almost eight times more than any qualified doctor. And he said to me, “Even taking eight times the fees helps the patient. When he pays so much, he gets well quickly. When he pays so much, he believes that the doctor is not ordinary. So it is not only a question of getting more money, it is a question of helping the patient. It is part of treatment.”
But the police were not ready to listen to me; he was presented before the magistrate. I went there too, and I said, “You should look at the record of how many people he cures. And those are the incurable people. They have been to allopathy, they have been to ayurveda, they have been to homeopathy. Nothing helps, but this man manages to help them. Now the real criterion should be how much service, how much help he has given, but you are simply bothering about certificates.”
The magistrate said, “I can understand you, but I have to follow the law.”
So the poor doctor is behind the bars. But I was continually talking to him, and he was very open and clear. He said, “I have arranged this whole thing as a hypnotic strategy. Once the patient is hypnotized, is ready to cooperate with me, once he trusts me…and he has to trust because he has paid so much money, and he has to trust because I am the last resort. He has been to all kinds of doctors. If I fail, then he has no hope, so naturally he has to trust me. And he can see that it is not an ordinary doctor’s clinic. It is so extraordinary that it is impossible for the doctor to fail.”

If somebody is not willing, the hypnotist has to create the willingness. Hypnotism is not some power in the hands of the hypnotist. That idea I want to criticize absolutely, without any conditions attached to it. It is thought all over the world that it is a power in the hands of the hypnotist. It is not; it is your power.
The hypnotist is only a help to awaken you to your own power, and then it can be used for many things: for healing, for making you live longer, for changing your harmful habits, smoking, drinking. It can do tremendous work.
It can be used as an educative methodology. You can learn in hypnosis better than you can learn ordinarily, because everything is silent and you are hearing only one voice. Even if somebody else comes and talks, you will not hear, you are open only to a small narrow way to the hypnotist. He can teach you any new language. He can teach you any new science. He can teach you arithmetic, anything within minutes for which people take hours and days to learn.
And it can be used for meditation too. As far as I am concerned hypnosis is simply a relaxed, deliberate sleep with a small opening, a little window, to the person who hypnotized you. He can tell you that your meditation will go deeper every day, and if this thought gets in your unconscious, your meditation will start going deeper. Just a few sessions and he can give you the last post-hypnotic suggestion: now you don’t need any hypnosis; your meditation will go deeper on its own accord.
Hypnosis has not been used in the whole of history for meditation, but it can be used, and it can be used with tremendous power, because you have to fight so much with your thoughts unnecessarily. That whole struggle with your mind can be dropped by hypnotic sessions without much effort.
Hypnosis is also capable of giving you a post-hypnotic suggestion, if you want to hypnotize yourself, by a simple strategy: count from one to one hundred, and from one hundred back to one. By the time you have reached back to one, you will fall into deep hypnosis. And you can tell yourself before going into hypnosis – because you will be alone – “The state of hypnosis will last only for fifteen minutes. After fifteen minutes I will come out of it.” This is auto-hypnosis.
Hetero-hypnosis means somebody is helping you. In the beginning it is good to take help. But you have to be very willing, in a very loveful atmosphere.
An old man was torturing his family continuously with this disease, that disease. And he was reading the encyclopedia and finding diseases. He was reading medical magazines and finding new diseases that have just been discovered, and he would immediately start torturing his family, “I am suffering from this disease.” It was a way of remaining in power. He was retired. Nobody cared about him; in fact, he was a burden. But even if you are a burden, you don’t want to be neglected. His method not to be neglected and not to be ignored was to create new diseases.
Doctors were tired because they said, “That man is strange, he has no disease. He just goes on reading and finding diseases from encyclopedias, and then we have to treat something which he has not got – and that may unnecessarily create trouble.” Medicine which is given to a person who has no disease may cause some trouble, particularly allopathic medicines which are almost all based on poison. So the doctors were saying, “We are tired, just…”
Then one doctor said, “It will be good if you go to a hypnotist. I have a friend who is a very good hypnotist, perhaps he may be helpful.” Now the old man is saying that he is suffering from sleeplessness, so the hypnotist will be perfectly the right person. He will give him sleep. He will also give him the post-hypnotic suggestion, “You will go to sleep – just drink hot milk before you go to bed and immediately you will fall asleep.” He will associate sleep with the hot milk, and once it gets associated in the mind, it works.
Every child knows that the teddy bear works; you take the teddy bear away, and the child cannot sleep. And everybody has his own methods of creating teddy bears. You will find somebody clutching his blanket. If you don’t allow him to clutch his blanket, he cannot sleep. Everybody has a certain posture of sleeping. If you don’t allow him that posture, he cannot sleep. These are natural ways of auto-hypnotizing yourself.
So the hypnotist was brought, and the old man was told, “Now you forget…all your diseases will be finished. We have found the greatest hypnotist.” The old man lay down, and the hypnotist said, “Just as I say you are falling asleep, asleep…and your eyelids are becoming heavy, so heavy, mountainously heavy so that you cannot keep them open…” And soon the old man was fast asleep.
The doctor took away his bag, slipped silently out, took his fees, and the family was very happy that this is the right man. But as the son came back, the old man opened one eye and said, “Has that crank gone or not?” He was not willing; he was just pretending. Immediately the moment he said, “Your eyes are becoming heavy,” he closed his eyes, listened to the whole thing, and knew that this is stupid. How can this create sleep?
Your willingness is absolutely needed. It is you who creates the hypnosis, not the person who hypnotizes you. But it is good in the beginning if you can help each other. There is nothing much to it; anybody you trust can help you and take you deep into hypnosis. And when you are in deep hypnosis he can check whether you are in deep hypnosis or not. He can push a needle in your hand; you will not feel it. He can take your hand up and leave it, and it will fall because you are not awake and you cannot keep it that way. So there are just a few small things he can try to find out if you are really in hypnosis.
Then he can tell you about meditation: whenever you sit to meditate, take a bath, make a special room for your meditation. Don’t do anything in that room so that it remains vibrating with your meditativeness. Burn incense, bring roses and flowers, sit silently. Close your eyes, watch your thoughts and you will immediately go into deep silence; thoughts will disappear. This can happen without hypnosis but it takes a longer time. Hypnosis is a short cut.
Your question is significant. You are asking, “How can hypnosis and meditation come together?” They can come together very easily. Hypnosis can be used for many purposes – it can be used for meditation. And the people who said you are being hypnotized by me are, in a way, right. Just because I don’t use methods of hypnotizing you, that does not mean that hypnosis is not created by you.
I am not hypnotizing you, but you love me, you trust me – that’s enough. And then when I stop for a moment, you also stop with me. When I am not speaking…just a gap, and you are also in a gap. Slowly, slowly your heart starts the same rhythm as my heart. My words start having a certain music, a certain solacing, a certain relaxing quality. All depends on love, all depends on trust, but you are creating it.
I am not hypnotizing – I am not a hypnotist.
I don’t need to be, I am myself. My presence is hypnotizing. So I don’t need to tell you, “Lie down and I will move a crystal…ding-dong, ding-dong. You are falling asleep, ding-dong….”
I have told you the story…
A sex maniac was being hypnotized by a ding-dong hypnotist, and the sex maniac jumped; he said, “Doctor, it works! My ding-dong is asleep!”
I am not a ding-dong hypnotist!…
I love you. I want to share my truth with you for no other reason except that I am so full of it, I cannot contain it. I want to share; I want to unburden myself. And if you are ready on the other end to receive it, hypnosis will happen automatically. And with hypnosis, because my insistence is continuously on meditation, you will find it easier to meditate here with me than anywhere else – in the beginning at least.
Later on, when you have developed on your own and you are more confident that you can fly in the silent spaces of your heart, then you will be able to create the same state anywhere; I will not be needed.
I don’t want you to be addicted to me – because I am not a drug, and I don’t want you to be addicted to anything. But you can use things which have been condemned by ignorant people, not knowing what they are saying. You can use them for tremendous benefit, for your spiritual growth.
Just an innocent heart is needed for meditation. And hypnosis can cleanse your heart and can bring you into the state of a small child.

Little Roger was frightened of the large bulldog that occupied the yard next to his home. One day, feeling adventurous, Roger climbed the fence. The huge bulldog rushed up to him and licked his face. The boy began to scream and his mother came running to his side.
“Did he bite you, darling?”
“Not yet,” whimpered Roger, “He just tasted me.”

That is the simplicity of a child.

Old Sam Rosenbaum was seventy-five, really very old, and finally got his nerve together to take a flight in a small airplane. As he climbed out after the ride, he turned to the pilot and said, “Sir, I wish to thank you for both those rides.”
“What are you talking about?” said the pilot, “You had only one ride.”
“Oh no I didn’t,” said old Sam. “I had two: my first and my last!”

In old age also, if people have lived rightly they come back to the same innocence of a child. And according to me, unless an old man becomes again a child, he has missed the opportunity of growing in the spiritual dimension; he has wasted his life in trivia. He has been collecting only seashells and colored stones on the sea beach, but he has not been able to discover the treasure of consciousness, awareness, enlightenment.
Hypnosis can be certainly used. Here we are going to create a school for hypnosis, where you will be able to learn how to auto-hypnotize yourself so you don’t have the dependence on the hypnotist. And then you can use that auto-hypnotizing process for meditation.
This is a pioneer effort to bring hypnosis and meditation together for the first time. But together they can be tremendously great. They can bring you so much light, so much blissfulness – and so easily. I like to repeat Chuang Tzu’s statement, “Easy is right; right is easy.” I don’t want you to become unnecessarily self-torturing, following unnecessarily long, arduous ways to come to yourself.
You don’t have to go anywhere.
I want to teach you the great pilgrimage from here to here. I want you to learn the art of reaching to God singing, dancing, rejoicing.
Laugh your way to God.
In essence that is my teaching.
And it is possible, with the help of hypnosis, to make meditation the easiest process. But drop any idea of condemnation of hypnosis, which you may have gathered because all the world, the whole world, is afraid of being hypnotized. There have been people, highly intelligent, who wanted to come to see me but they finally decided not to because they were afraid they may be hypnotized. Nobody can hypnotize you against your will.
Millions of people would like to come. They are reading my books, they are listening to my tapes, they are seeing the videos, but they are afraid to come close to me. A fear has been created by the so-called religious leaders that they will be hypnotized.
It happened that one famous but ugly and pornographic magazine, Stern, from Germany, had sent a reporter. He became so interested because he wanted to write an inside story. So he meditated, he listened to me, he did everything that sannyasins are doing here. He became so joyful and blissful that he became a sannyasin! He wrote the story, he went back. The Stern editorial board was very annoyed. The first thing they said was, “You have been hypnotized. We cannot publish your article. You have written it under hypnosis.”
He said, “What nonsense you are talking!”
They did not publish his article. On the contrary, they fired him. And they managed to distort his article the way they wanted: they left out everything that was positive, they inserted their own interpretations, and colored the whole thing in such an ugly and negative way that even he was surprised, because when they fired him…and he was one of their most important chief reporters.
He had come to live here, then he lived in the commune in America, and I think soon he will be coming back. Wherever he will be, he will be a sannyasin. He has tasted the experience himself. It is no more a borrowed knowledge; it has entered into his being, but it is not hypnosis.
He was wrongly understood, and he was wrongly condemned. Journalists come, but they always are spectators. They will not know what is happening to people in their inner being. Unless they become insiders, their reports are worthless. Many other people come, just as spectators to see what is happening.
This place is not for spectators.
This place is only for those who have courage to participate in this tremendous experiment of consciousness awakening.

============================================================

Osho,
It seems to me that you are truly the first man this planet has ever known who really understands women and accepts them. Please comment.
I have told you that a woman is to be loved, not understood. That is the first understanding.
Life is so mysterious that our hands cannot reach to its heights, our eyes cannot look into its deepest mystery. Understanding any expression of existence – men or women or trees or animals or birds – is the function of science, not of a mystic. I am not a scientist. To me science itself is a mystery, and now scientists have started to recognize it – they are dropping their old stubborn, superstitious attitude that one day they will know all that is to be known.
With Albert Einstein the whole history of science has taken a very different route because the more he went into the deepest core of matter, the more he became puzzled. All logic was left behind, all rationality was left behind. You cannot dictate to existence, because it does not follow your logic. Logic is man-made.
There was a point in Albert Einstein’s life when he remembers that he was wavering about whether to insist on being rational…but that would be foolish. It would be human, but not intelligent. Even if you insist on logic, on rationality, existence is not going to change according to your logic; your logic has to change according to existence. And the deeper you go, existence becomes more and more mysterious.
A point comes when you have to leave logic and rationality and just listen to nature. I call it the ultimate understanding – but not in the ordinary sense of understanding. You know it, you feel it, but there is no way to say it.
Man is a mystery, woman is a mystery, everything that exists is a mystery – and all our efforts to figure it out are going to fail.
I am reminded of a man who was purchasing in a toy shop a present for his son for Christmas. He was a well-known mathematician, so naturally the shopkeeper brought out a jigsaw puzzle. The mathematician tried…it was a beautiful puzzle. He tried and tried and tried and started perspiring. It was becoming awkward: the customers and the salesmen and the shopkeeper were all watching and he has not been able to bring the puzzle to a solution.
Finally he dropped the idea and he shouted at the shopkeeper: “I am a mathematician and if I cannot solve this jigsaw puzzle, how do you think my small boy will be able to?”
The shopkeeper said, “You don’t understand. It is made in such a way that nobody can solve it – mathematician or no mathematician.”
The mathematician asked, “But why is it made in this way?”
The shopkeeper said, “It is made in this way so that the boy from the very beginning starts learning that life cannot be solved, cannot be understood.”

You can live it, you can rejoice in it, you can become one with the mystery, but the idea of understanding as an observer is not at all possible.
I don’t understand myself. The greatest mystery to me is myself. But a few clues I can give to you:

A psychiatrist is a fellow who asks you a lot of expensive questions that your wife asks you for nothing.
The key to happiness: You may speak of love and tenderness and passion, but real ecstasy is discovering you haven’t lost your keys after all.
Women begin by resisting a man’s advances and end by blocking his retreat.
If you want to change a woman’s mind, agree with her.
If you want to know what a woman really means, look at her – don’t listen to her.

The lady walked up to the policeman and said, “Officer, that man on the corner is annoying me.”
“I have been watching the whole time,” said the cop, “and that man wasn’t even looking at you.”
“Well,” said the woman, “isn’t that annoying?”

The romantic young man turned to the beautiful young girl in his bed and asked, “Am I the first man you ever made love to?”
She thought for a moment and then said, “You could be – I have a terrible memory for faces.”

A young girl said to an old maid, “You must have missed a great deal by not marrying!”
“Only the ceremony!” replied the old maid.

In the Garden of Eden, Eve was nagging Adam, as usual. “I saw you playing around with another woman underneath the tree of knowledge last night!” she screamed.
“But Eve,” said Adam, “you know that there is only you and I here in Eden!”
“Don’t lie to me! I always know when you are lying!” Eve whined.
“Eve, listen! This is just a fantasy brought on by your menopause.”
“Don’t give me any psychological bullshit! I know what I saw!” Eve roared.
“Okay, okay, then if you don’t believe me, just count my ribs.”

A man went on a safari with his wife and his mother-in-law. One day he was lying morosely in his tent when he heard a cry from his wife. He jumped up and rushed into the clearing. There, out in the open, he saw mama-in-law shaking her fist at a huge lion who was standing five feet away from her, ready to move.
“Do something!” pleaded his wife in alarm.
“Why should I?” retorted the frustrated hunter. “That lion got himself into this mess – let him get himself out of it!”

Everything is mysterious: it is better to enjoy it rather than trying to understand it. Ultimately the man who goes on trying to understand life proves to be a fool, and the man who enjoys life becomes wise goes on enjoying life, because he becomes more and more aware of the mysterious that surrounds us.
The greatest understanding is to know that nothing can be understood, that all is mysterious and miraculous. To me this is the beginning of religion in your life.

Osho,
I love to do tai chi and it has become my daily meditation, but I have a tendency to become too serious about it. Can you drive out the monkey?
It is impossible for anybody to drive the monkey out of your mind, because it does not exist; your seriousness is creating it. And nobody can change your seriousness either. It is your life attitude which is making you serious. What is there to be serious about? Existence is a continuous celebration, a festival that knows no holidays.
You are serious because for thousands of years people have been telling you that the serious man is a better man, higher man, more evolved than the nonserious. The nonserious have never been taken into account.
But to me the situation is just the reverse. The nonserious one is the one who will come to know the real life and its experiences. Seriousness is closing you, making you hard, making you sad. Seriousness comes from ambition, from desire which you are not being able to attain.
But the religions have paid too much respect to seriousness. I have never come across in any religious scripture of any religion – and there are three hundred religions on the earth – that anybody has paid respect to nonseriousness, to playfulness, to a sense of humor. They all make you dodos.

I have heard…one day as the bishop entered a church in New York, he could not believe his eyes: he saw Jesus Christ standing there.
He said, “My god! I thought that prayers are never heard. I never believed that there is any God or any son of God – but what to do with this fellow? Either he is a hippie or he is Jesus Christ. I am in trouble.”
He approached the man and asked, “Can I ask you who you are?”
And the man said, “You have been serving me, spreading my word, and you don’t recognize me!”
The bishop’s heart started sinking: “My god! He is Jesus Christ! And now there is bound to be trouble.”
He phoned the pope in Rome: “What am I supposed to do? In our teaching courses there is not even a single mention that ‘Jesus will come one day to your church.’ So what has to be done, what is the right course? How should I behave?”
The pope said, “Don’t create trouble for me! It is good that he has come to New York. Do two things: first, the most important, look serious and busy. Who knows, he may be…And second, don’t forget to inform the police.”

Religions have been teaching people to be serious because seriousness creates a certain kind of dullness in your consciousness. Seriousness is not a help. It is poisonous; nobody can take it away, unless you understand…then it will disappear.

A psychiatrist and a friend were walking down the street, and a stranger passing by suddenly kicked the psychiatrist in the shins. The shrink walked on as if nothing had happened. His friend was astounded. “Aren’t you going to do anything about it?” he cried.
“Why should I?” asked the psychiatrist. “It’s his problem.”

If the monkey is there inside you, it is his problem! He must be getting tortured with your seriousness and your tai chi. Don’t be worried. He himself will be trying to find a way to get out of the mess.
A man who is playful does not bother about things like tai chi! There is so much to enjoy around and you, like an idiot, do tai chi! Naturally you are becoming serious. A beautiful woman passes by…and you are doing tai chi! Can’t you do anything playful, blissful, pleasant? Naturally you are becoming serious because you are losing contact with life.
There are all kinds of idiots in the world. Somebody is doing tai chi, somebody is doing acid, somebody is doing jujitsu, somebody is doing yoga, standing on his head. Now, I don’t think any woman is going to be interested in you: this kind of fellow who is standing on his head is already dead! So then nobody takes interest in you, and you become serious. You are creating it, and you want me to chase it out. I am not responsible for it. Who suggested you do tai chi?

I have heard that three missionaries were caught by cannibals in southern Africa. The chief of the cannibals asked the first, “Which do you want – you can choose – do you want ‘chi-chi’ or do you want death?”
The man thought about it and he said, “Whatever chi-chi is, it cannot be worse than death.” So he said, “I want chi-chi.”
So he was given the treatment they called chi-chi. He was sexually abused, beaten…and as chi-chi started, he started thinking, “It was better to choose death. These people will kill me by chi-chi, and they are unnecessarily humiliating me.”
And the other two missionaries were watching what was going on. Then the turn came to the second: “What do you want?”
Death is such a dangerous thing…he thought, “One can survive chi-chi, but death you cannot survive.” He also said, “Chi-chi.”
So again the whole game began. All the cannibals were beating him and doing all kinds of stupid sexual perversions – and the poor missionary had come to save them…!
Now the turn came of the third, who was the chief missionary. The chief asked, “What do you think – chi-chi or death?”
He said, “It will be a great mercy if you allow me death. Chi-chi I have seen.”
But the chief said, “This is a problem: we don’t kill anybody before chi-chi, and after chi-chi nobody survives!”

Now what are you interested in tai chi for? Naturally it will make you serious. You will forget laughing, you will forget a sense of humor – a man of tai chi has to be serious. And you are asking me to take out the seriousness…and the monkey. The monkey comes in the same package! You become serious and the monkey will come in.
And as far as the monkey is concerned, it is his problem – you don’t worry. You just get rid of this chi-chi.
Just to deceive you they have changed the name to tai chi!

Osho,
Please forgive me.
I cannot put myself on the line enough. I am at your feet.
You must be living in a misunderstanding, because I have never been angry at you; I have never been angry at anyone, Ronald Reagan included!
Asking to be forgiven…you are asking something which must be your projection. I have never been angry at anyone. You have been always forgiven, but you must be carrying something in your mind. You say, “I cannot put myself on the line enough.”
Who is asking you to put yourself on the line enough? As you are, you are perfectly okay and acceptable and lovable – but you seem to be a martyr.
Who can be perfect in this world?
The world itself is not perfect, because perfection means death. If you want to live, you have to remain a little bit imperfect always, so that you can go on perfecting yourself. Evolution is nothing but a constant imperfection. Imperfection gives you space to grow into.
And remember one thing: you will never be perfect. You will be coming closer and closer and closer, but you will never be perfect. Perfection is not allowed by the laws of nature itself.
And the idea that “I cannot put myself on the line enough” – there is no need. Put on the line as much as you enjoy – that is enough.
But I have a feeling that you want to go up the ladder to the highest rung…But you don’t know that the ladder at the highest rung goes nowhere. You come to the highest rung and then you look stupid. Then your whole life is wasted: you have become the president, you have become the prime minister and all kinds of nonsense people. But they all feel awkward; that’s why they go on smiling to hide…so that nobody suspects that they have been stupid. There are ladders and ladders….
Hymie Goldberg is right. He became the richest man and when asked, “What have you learned?” he said, “Nothing but climbing ladders – and at the end there is nothing.”
But you cannot even say that at the end there is nothing.
You are perfectly good. You have always been good. My love to you has never wavered. It does not waver to anybody. And I know your devotion, your dedication; it is immensely valuable.
But you are living in some misunderstanding. Drop that misunderstanding. You are on the line, and there is no need to be forgiven. You have all my love, as everybody else has. Here there is no hierarchy. Here there is nobody higher and nobody lower.

There was to be a christening party for the new baby, but before the ceremony the priest took the new father aside and asked, “Are you prepared for this solemn event?”
“I think so,” replied the father. “I’ve got cheese rolls, salad and cake.”
“No, no,” interrupted the priest, “I mean spiritually prepared?”
“Well, I don’t know,” said the man thoughtfully. “Do you think two cases of whiskey are enough?”

You are living in some fantasy about yourself and torturing yourself. A few people like torturing…And I told you, here there is no hierarchy. And that’s one of the most important things to be remembered: the people who are doing the work are just functional; they are not higher than you.
In the commune in America…because I was silent and in isolation, people created hierarchies just out of their routine habit. As I came out, those who were at the top of the hierarchy tried to persuade me that I should not speak, that things are going well and I should not see anybody – everybody is okay.
I asked, “Then what is the purpose of me being here? If they are all okay, I should go back to my country where nobody is okay.” I had to insist: “Now it is enough. Three years is enough, and I want to come to my people and see what is happening.”
And when I started speaking the whole gang that had created the hierarchy escaped, because now there was no possibility…wherever I am there is no hierarchy, only functions. Somebody is doing cleaning, somebody is doing the work of the secretary, somebody is doing the work of the person in charge of the ashram, but there is nobody higher and lower.
And you should remember a very significant law:
The organization of any bureaucracy is very much like a septic tank – the really big chunks always rise to the top!
Don’t be bothered.

Osho,
Several times I have read in your books, or heard you mention, the psychological fact that man thinks about woman once every three minutes, while woman only thinks about man once every seven minutes. Is this only a psychological difference, or does it go deeper? To be more specific, please explain the two (or four) sides of the midnight bedroom dilemma of “I have a headache.”
A few things first. The psychological fact of man thinking about woman every three minutes – they cannot wait more than that – is only average, because science talks only about averages. Don’t believe that you are the average person; the average person does not exist. There may be people who are thinking only of women all the time!

A psychologist was testing a patient. He drew a straight line on the paper and asked the patient, “What does it remind you of?”
He said, “It reminds me of women.”
The psychologist said, “Strange. A straight line?” But he tried more lines. He made a triangle and asked the man, “What does this remind you of?”
The man said, “You seem to be a strange person. This reminds me of women!”
The psychologist made a round circle. The man got very angry. He said, “You are coming too close. I am suffering from women, and you are reminding me of them again and again. Are you a sex maniac or something?”
The psychologist said, “It is a very strange, peculiar case. Why do these things remind you of women?”
The man said, “Everything reminds me of women! Look out of the window” – a camel was going by. “That camel too reminds me of women. You remind me of women! In fact, I don’t think about anything else – this is my whole life philosophy.”

Those three minutes are for average people – and average people don’t exist. It is just a mathematical calculation in which children are included who don’t think of women; in which really ripe and grown-up people are included who don’t think of women; in which sex maniacs are included who don’t think about anything else…. So don’t be satisfied with the average; just look at yourself and find out how many minutes you can remain without thinking of women.
My own experience of thousands of men is that the gap is at the most one minute. You can keep a watch in front of you and test whether in one minute the idea of women comes or not. And you will be surprised: “My god. Every minute I am thinking of women.”
The case with women is totally different. Seven minutes is also an average, but ordinarily no woman thinks of man every seven minutes. The average is because women sex maniacs also exist. There are women who don’t think of men at all – hours pass – and they feel great relief.
And you are asking me – this has become the midnight bedroom dilemma of “I have a headache.” That is a female thing, not a male thing. It is a female strategy. Unless you are very close to female chemistry you will not say, “I have a headache.”
Man uses the woman just like sleeping pills. Sex gives him a good sleep. All energy is gone out of him. Now there is nothing else to do except to fall asleep and hope that in the morning he can get up.
Man’s mind is different than woman’s mind. They function in different directions.
Doctors, who are mainly men, have researched and come to the conclusion that no man has died while making love. That’s true. In the whole history of billions of human beings no man has died by making love, while making love. Nobody has suffered a heart attack while making love.
So for man, woman is almost a commodity to be used for good sleep, for no heart attack, for avoiding death as far as he can.
But the woman has been almost tortured. First she has had her orgasmic joy taken away, because man finishes too soon, before the woman has even begun. The difference in the orgasmic capacity between man and woman is immense; it is a recent discovery, in this century – the whole humanity in the past has lived in darkness.
Man’s sexuality is local, genital. Woman’s sexuality is widespread, all over her body. Naturally, to attain an orgasmic experience her whole body has to throb with joy, tremble with ecstasy – but that will take time. By the time her whole body is ready and trembling and feeling a dance of energy in her being, the man is fast asleep. He is finished, he has gone to sleep.
Man has been in many ways cruel, primitive and barbarous towards women. He has never cared what she feels; he is only concerned with himself. He has been using women – and remember the most humiliating thing in the world is to be used, because that brings you down from your dignity into a commodity.
Commodities are used. Human beings are not used, but women have been used for thousands of years. In fact, they have even forgotten that they have any orgasmic capacity. Naturally, they try to avoid this ugly scene as much as possible; hence “I have a headache” is a feminine strategy.
You are in a deep misunderstanding; put things right! If you want a woman not to have a headache, then be playful with her: sing, dance, bring to your bedroom the atmosphere of a temple, burn incense, take a good bath after the whole day’s…And your love should be the climax.
But wait! Unless the woman starts throbbing and trembling and starts becoming ecstatic, only then making love to her will you have an orgasmic experience and she will have an orgasmic experience. And when both orgasmic experiences happen simultaneously, it is a tremendous phenomenon. Religiously it is a tremendous phenomenon, because it will give you the first glimpse of meditation.
My own understanding is that man has come to know about meditation from no other source, because there is no other source available. How did man start to think, in the very beginning, about meditation? Mind, you know, is natural; meditation has to be achieved. Something must have given him a glimpse beyond mind. Orgasmic experience gives you a state when time stops, mind stops, and you are sheer joy.
That has been, according to me, the source of thinking that going beyond mind is possible. And if it is possible in sexual orgasm, a few adventurous people, pioneers, must have tried…why can’t it be possible alone? Because two things they have got absolutely correct: time stops, mind stops.
Of course you cannot stop time directly; hence the conclusion: stop the mind. And the moment mind is silent and has stopped, time stops, and suddenly you find yourself, without any sexuality, in an orgasmic joy which is far deeper than the sexual. In sex you are dependent on the other person; now you are absolutely free.
If people like Gautam Buddha or Mahavira became celibate…it was not that through being celibate they became Gautam Buddha and Mahavira. The situation is just the reverse: they became Gautam Buddha and Mahavira by meditation and they found a far bigger freedom and orgasmic joy. Sex disappeared from their life.
But people have looked at it wrongly. From the outside you cannot see their orgasmic joy; you can only see that this man has become celibate. Perhaps by becoming celibate you will also attain the orgasmic joy. It does not work that way.
Mind has to stop first, then time stops. And when both time and mind are stopped you have tremendous ecstasy, ecstasy so great…There is not only a difference of degree between sexual orgasm and spiritual orgasm; the difference is qualitative: it has a beauty of its own, a blissfulness of its own, a contentment of its own.
But the whole of humanity has been misled because of a logical fallacy. People saw that Bodhidharma or Sanai or Ta Hui have become celibate…perhaps by becoming celibate we will attain to their enlightenment. But by becoming celibate you will become only a pervert.
Just the other day my news service, Anando, has brought the news that in Europe Catholic bishops and priests are leaving the churches and getting married. And the fear has arisen…in the backward countries many people have been converted and now they are becoming bishops and cardinals. Perhaps the day is not far away when black people will be teaching in the white countries as bishops and cardinals. And then the final step is the first black man becoming the pope – because it is a question of majority or minority, and white bishops are becoming the minority every day.
But those priests are on the right path. They have suffered unnecessarily and now they have gathered courage and they are marrying. My feeling is it is a good sign.
But the Catholic church is afraid that black people may dominate Catholicism. That would be a strange situation, because the white man has always thought that he is carrying the whole burden of humanity, that he is responsible for everybody’s salvation. It is not going to be so anymore. Soon black people will be the saviors of white people. You have saved for many centuries, now give them a chance. You have not been able to save anything; perhaps black people may be able to save.
The danger is greater because black people are sexually more powerful than white people…perhaps because of the climate, their situation, their food. If black people start dominating the Catholic church, then there is going to be an immense perversion of sexuality; it is now Africa which is suffering most from the disease AIDS. But this influx cannot be stopped; the Catholics have invited it themselves.
Just try to be alert and don’t imitate, and your seriousness will be gone, your headache will be gone.

Father John, a Catholic priest, was astonished one day to see his friend, Father Michael, driving a Mercedes-Benz. He asked him how he could afford such a great car when all he could afford was a bicycle.
So Father Michael told him that one day during the prayer before the collection he was swinging his rosary when he realized that the whole congregation was hypnotized. So he told everyone to empty their wallets and when he counted the money he had enough to buy a car.
Father John said, “That’s great. I’m going to try it.”
But a few weeks later when they met again, Father John was still riding his bicycle.
“What happened?” asked his friend.
“Well,” said Father John, “everything went just as you said and the congregation was completely in my power. But just then I dropped the rosary and said, ‘Oh shit,’ and I’m still cleaning the church!”

Paddy and Maureen live in an old house, very close to the railway station, and every time a train goes by, the door of their bedroom wardrobe opens by itself. Maureen gets so fed up with this that one day she calls a carpenter to come and fix it. But he can’t locate the problem and he decides that the only thing to do is to get inside it, close the door and watch what happens.
Just then Paddy comes home. He sees a pair of men’s shoes in the bedroom and starts looking around for the owner, but before Maureen can explain a train goes by, the wardrobe opens by itself, and the carpenter is revealed inside.
Paddy is furious. “And what the hell are you doing here?” he cries.
“You won’t believe this,” says the man, “but I’m waiting for a train!”

Life is so hilarious, and you are having a headache!
Enjoy life and you will forget not only the headache but even the head, because one remembers the head only when he has a headache – have you noticed that? My definition for a healthy man is that he does not feel his body at all. The moment you have a heartache you feel the heart; the moment you have a stomachache you feel the stomach; when you have a headache you feel the head. If you are perfectly healthy you will not feel the body at all. It is simply there.
But mistakes happen because our clarity about existence is not meditative. Our mind is continuously creating unnecessary problems, unnecessary dilemmas.

Hymie Goldberg was a string salesman from New York. His boss sent him to the deep South in order to open some new accounts for the company, but Hymie encountered discrimination everywhere he went and was unable to do any business. Finally, in Mississippi, an anti-Semitic store owner said to Hymie, “Okay, Jew, I’ll buy as much string as reaches from the end of your Jewish nose to the tip of your Jewish prick.”
A month later, the same store owner was surprised to receive four hundred cartons of grade “A” string. Inside was a bill for twenty-five thousand dollars and a note which said: Thank you for your generous order. I hope we can do business again soon. Signed: Hymie Goldberg. Living in New York, circumcised in Warsaw.

That much length…! Just be clever and you can use any situation for being happy.

Osho,
Sitting in front of us, what do you see? Do you find all these jokes while looking at us?
You are right. I have to confess it: looking at you, what else can be found? You are all a joke unto yourself.
Gautam Buddha said as his last statement: “Be a light unto yourself.” The day I leave the body please remind me, so that I can make my last statement: “Be a joke unto yourself.” That is far more joyful than being a light unto yourself. What are you going to do with a light? Light your cigars, or burn people’s houses?
But being a joke unto yourself, you will be a bliss for everyone.
You are right…this is the way I find jokes – looking at you. So be aware when I look at you; I am searching for a joke!

A big old Indian was sitting in a bar out West when a dirty hippie came in and started to drink a lot and insult all the other people there. Soon everyone had left the bar in disgust except for the old Indian who just watched the hippie with interest.
So the hippie walked over to him and said, “Hey, Indian, what the hell are you staring at?”
“Well,” said the Indian, “many years ago I was arrested for making love to a buffalo, and I just had a feeling that maybe you are my son.”

I see your troubles and really…I take them seriously, but deep inside I am giggling. Not to offend you I talk about your problems, which are sheer nonsense – but don’t tell it to anybody!

Once there was a man who had everything a man could desire: a wonderful job that he liked, a wonderful wife and wonderful children, but then one day he began to see spots in front of his eyes. At first he tried to ignore them, but they began to get worse. So finally he paid a visit to the doctor. The doctor examined him but could find nothing wrong with him, so he sent him to a specialist, a neurosurgeon, who examined him thoroughly with many tests. He also could find nothing.
But he said to the man, “Although I can find nothing specific, I have seen cases like this before; often it is some pressure on the brain, which usually results in death after six months to a year.”
The man became very upset, but then he decided that if indeed he only had such a short time to live, he would enjoy life and do everything he ever wanted. The man loved nice clothes, so he went to the best tailor in town and said, “Give me the best clothes you have in your store: English imported suits, Italian leather shoes, hand-stitched silk ties, and one dozen of the best tailored silk shirts, size fourteen neck.”
The tailor who had taken all his measurements said to him, “Fourteen neck? You don’t have a fourteen neck – you have a fifteen neck!”
“Don’t tell me what I have,” said the man, “I have been wearing a size fourteen neck all my adult life.”
“Well, if that’s so,” said the tailor, “then you must be seeing spots in front of your eyes!”

Seeing you, certainly I rejoice. So many jokes all around! Perhaps this is the first gathering in the world where jokes are being used for your spiritual growth….
And you cannot be otherwise – unless you become enlightened. Only enlightened people don’t have anything in life which you can make a joke of. But in ignorance and unconsciousness, whatever you do is somehow hilarious – your fights, your love affairs, your marriages, your divorces. If you start watching your behavior, you will find out for yourself – “My god. My whole life is full of jokes!”
And it will be a great revelation…far greater than the revelation of God, because that too is only a joke and nothing else.

============================================================

Osho,
What does it mean when you don't answer a question?
Not answering a question, is also answering it – but you have to be more intelligent to understand it. People don’t understand even the answered questions, but my approach is hope for the best and expect the worst! Whether you get it or not, I will haunt you until you get it.
There are questions which can be answered only by not answering them; they are real questions. Only unreal questions can be answered, only questions arising out of the mind can be answered.
But there are also questions which arise not out of your mind, but our of your very being. They are not questions of curiosity, but questions of deep longing, searching, seeking. They are not accidental – you have not asked them just “by the way.” Their meaning is as precious as life itself. Those questions can be answered only by silence.
Jesus spoke continuously for three years; that was his whole period of work. He started his work at the age of thirty, and people crucified him at the age of thirty-three. His period of work was very short, while Buddha worked for forty-two years, Mahavira worked for forty years.
There is only one question that Jesus did not answer. In those three years, thousands of questions were asked, and he answered them. He answered the way people have very rarely answered – with such sincerity and such authority that even his enemies used to say, “We have never heard a man speak this way! The same language, the same words, but from an authentic individual their fragrance is different, their music is different. Their penetration is deep; they touch your very heart.”
Jesus’ words are not just words, empty and contentless; his words are his very being. He is pouring himself in his words – and that makes the difference, the great difference.
But one question he has not answered, and that was the question asked by a sympathizer who wanted to save him. It was asked by the governor of Judea, Pontius Pilate. Judea was a slave country under the Roman Empire, and Pontius Pilate was the Roman governor of Judea. He was not a Jew, hence he could not understand why the Jews were so mad against an innocent young man. Jesus may have been saying things which they don’t agree with, but that does not mean that a person should be crucified. It shows really the weakness of you who cannot answer his arguments.
The Jews had a great number of learned rabbis – they could have challenged Jesus. Jesus was an uneducated carpenter’s son; he knew nothing of scriptures, but he knew something more valuable. It seems he knew himself. And that is the only holy scripture there is.
The learned rabbis were angry because an uneducated man was speaking with such authority. They were hesitant about their own beliefs…they were also talking great things, but all those great ideas were borrowed. He was speaking directly, spontaneously, according to his own experience – not within quotes.
Pontius Pilate’s wife was a very educated woman; she heard many stories about Jesus, and many times she went in disguise to hear him. She was immensely impressed, and it was she who convinced Pontius Pilate that what is going on – this insistence of the Jews, of the crowd, of the masses, to crucify a young man – is simply ugly, inhuman…“and you have to do something.”
Pontius Pilate called Jesus to his palace. The man was so beautiful and so simple, so poor, so humble, that there was immediately a rapport between Pontius Pilate and Jesus. Pontius Pilate was a very learned Roman scholar. He could see at least that the young man had something in his being which was radiant, which those learned rabbis didn’t have. But they had power….
He wanted to save Jesus, although it was risky…risky because if the whole Jewish population of Judea – and they were the only people in Judea – were against Pontius Pilate, he might lose his tremendously powerful position. The Roman government, the Roman emperor would not want a governor in Judea who is not liked by the people, so it was against his own position. But still he wanted to do everything to save him.
The last question he asked was not answered by Jesus. The question was, “What is truth?” Jesus looked into his eyes, utterly silent, and did not say a single word.
Pontius Pilate understood the meaning of the not answered question, and he felt even more sorry and in a dilemma – what to do? Still he tried…. As he went into his house, the first thing he did was to wash his hands. That act – of washing his hands – remained uncommented on for two thousand years.
It was Sigmund Freud in the early part of this century – strangely, himself a Jew – who first made the statement that Pontius Pilate washed his hands because he wanted to be clear, at least before God, that he was not responsible for the crucifixion of this beautiful young man. “I wash my hands, I don’t have his blood on my hands.”
He tried to put up three people for crucifixion. It was an ancient tradition in Judea that the people could ask for at least one person to be released from being crucified, and he was hoping that by putting up three persons, the Jews would certainly ask for Jesus to be released.
Jesus was a Jew; he was not a Christian – he had never heard the word Christian. He was born a Jew, he lived a Jew, he died a Jew. The word Christian came into existence three hundred years later.
But when Pontius Pilate came and asked the people – and thousands of people had gathered – “According to the convention, I can release one person from crucifixion. He will be made completely free…”he was shocked that they all shouted only one name. That name was not Jesus; that name was of a murderer who had murdered at least seven people. I say at least because that was on the record of the government; he may have murdered more, he was a born murderer and criminal. His name was Barabbas – and the whole Jewish crowd, without exception, asked that Barabbas should be released.
No man of any intelligence could have believed it, and even Barabbas could not believe it. He was also thinking that this young man – he has not done anything wrong, he has not harmed anybody, he has not committed anything criminal – is bound to be released.
He could not believe his own ears when he heard that people were asking for Barabbas. Even when he was released, going out in the crowd, he looked again and again with unbelieving eyes: What is happening…? All these people know him; he is a drunkard, he is a murderer, he is a robber – there is not any crime that he has not committed. These are the people who know him, and these are the people who have put him into the hands of the government. Strange, why have they asked…?
And Jesus was crucified.
It is a very strange story: his whole life he answered every question, and at the last, when a significant question was asked, he remained silent. Do you think he did not answer? He answered by his silence. Nothing can be said about truth, and anything that is said about truth is not truth.
You can be truth, but you cannot say anything about it.
So when sometimes it happens that I don’t answer a question it means the question is of the category which can be answered only in silence. But I don’t want you to be so serious…! Truth, or untruth – but don’t be serious! If you want me to answer any question…I am ready to lie, but I will answer.
I care more about you than any truth.

Eunice came home with a brand-new mink coat.
“Where did you get that?” asked her husband, Bernie.
“I won it in a raffle,” she replied. The following night, Eunice walked in with a beautiful diamond bracelet.
“Where did that come from?” asked Bernie.
“I won it in a raffle,” said Eunice. “I’m going to another raffle party tonight, and I’m in a hurry. Would you mind drawing my bath?”
Bernie did as instructed, but when Eunice came in to take her bath, she found that there was only a half-inch of water in the tub.
“Bernie,” she asked, “Why didn’t you fill the tub?”
“Well, darling,” he answered, “I didn’t want you to get your raffle ticket wet!”

Osho,
Will you please say something about how you work on us?
Have I to say even that too? Can’t you figure out how I work on you? You are asleep, that is true, but not that much asleep! And why have you written behind your name, “Indian”? Because here, in this temple, there is no one who is Indian, and there is no one who is German. This is the only gathering in the whole world where there are only human beings. Perhaps it is because of your Indian mind that is still hanging around you that such a question arises.
I am working on you from morning to evening, from evening to morning…even in the night, even in your dreams I am working on you – and you don’t understand how I am working? That means I will have to say a few things about Indians!
…Indians are all alike, but they have different faces so you can tell them apart.
…There are two types of people in this world: those who come into the room and say, “Well, here I am!” and those who come in and say, “Ah, there you are!”
The first ones are the Indians; they are the most egoistic people on the earth – “Here I am.” Their “I” perhaps is the most subtle and strong and ancient “I.” Every Indian thinks he is spiritual; it is very difficult to find an Indian who is not a great saint! At least, I have not found one yet.
There is an Indian saying, “Opportunity always knocks at the least opportune moment.” That is true for India. This reminds me of Carnegie, one of the richest men in America. He was delivering a talk in a university, and he said something about opportunity, and a student asked, “You are right in saying, ‘If you use the opportunity you can also become as rich as I am’ – but how to know when the opportunity comes? As far as I am concerned, I become aware only when it is gone, and then I say, ‘My god, it was an opportunity’ – but it is too late. So what do you suggest I should do?”
Carnegie said, “As far as I am concerned, I keep on jumping. I don’t wait for the opportunity; whenever it comes I will ride on it – but I go on jumping. I am always ready…it will come. But if you are not ready, then you will become aware only when it has passed, because opportunity passes in a single moment.”
India has been losing all kinds of opportunities because people go on waiting, as if it is God’s responsibility to do things for you. People go on repeating that when things will become worse – and I am amazed how things can be worse than they are! – then God will come in an incarnation and save people. This means: Try to make your opportunities and life worse, so God comes sooner. And they are trying hard! They are becoming more poor, they are becoming more retarded, they are becoming more addicted with the past, they don’t think of the future.
These are the signs of a country which is too old: in the future there is only death and nothing else.
Indians must have one of the best countries in the world, with all kinds of climates, with all kinds of different cultures, people. But it has not used any opportunity; it is a fatalist country, it believes in fate. If things are going to be better, they will be better; if they are going to be worse, they will be worse – you cannot do anything. This impotence has become symbolic of the Indian mind.
There is another Indian saying – and these sayings show the wisdom of centuries – “If the shoe fits, it is ugly.” A strange statement! Whenever things are good, Indians don’t feel good: if the shoe fits, it is ugly. The shoe is good only when it pinches….

Mulla Nasruddin was purchasing a pair of shoes, and the shopkeeper was saying, “Mulla, you are trying an almost impossible job. You are trying to force your foot into a shoe which is one size smaller than you need.”
Mulla said, “You keep quiet! I know what kind of shoes I need.”
The shopkeeper was very much puzzled, but Mulla managed to force his foot into a small shoe, and tears came to his eyes. The shopkeeper said, “What are you doing?”
Mulla said, “You don’t understand the philosophy of it.”
The shopkeeper said, “There is some philosophy in it?” – in India everything is philosophical!
Mulla said, “Yes, this is not an ordinary philosophy, but a great philosophy. This is the only thing that keeps me happy.”
The man said, “And tears are coming to your eyes….”
Nasruddin said, “That’s why I cry the whole day: it is pinching so much that I forget all worries, all difficult problems – the wife that is waiting at home, the difficult children, the ugly neighbors, business failures – everything is forgotten when the shoe is pinching. And when I reach home and I take the shoes off, it is such a relief! This is the only relief in twenty-four hours. I feel so good and so grateful to God that one day has passed…. Now the problem will arise again the next day, in the morning; I can rest the whole night, and my sleep is really deep, because of the whole day’s torture.”

But this is the philosophy of this country. People are living in self-inflicted torture. Torture has become something of a religious discipline: the more you torture yourself, the more religious you are and the closer to God.
Another proverb for you:
…The advantage of a bad memory is that one enjoys several times the same good things for the first time.
That’s how Indians go on remaining in utter misery, but still contented. It is simply a case of bad memory; they forget that it was the same yesterday, and it was the same the day before yesterday. Every day seems to them to be new – and it has been so old and so dirty. It has been for centuries the same slavery, the same poverty, the same suffering, but every day the Indian gets up and thinks that everything seems to be new. Just a case of bad memory…but very advantageous: you will not find anywhere in the world people so contented and so miserable at the same time.
…You should look into Indian proverbs and you will find the very heart of the Indian personality. Another proverb says:
…Don’t worry over what other people are thinking about you. They are too busy worrying over what you are thinking about them.
…He who laughs last is most likely a German. The Indian never laughs.
…For an Indian, cleanliness is next to impossible!
…To an Indian, to err is human, but it feels divine!
…To the Indian mind, it is absolutely clear:
…Never put off until tomorrow what you can avoid altogether!
…There is no time like the present for postponing what you don’t want to do!
…A small ad in a Pune newspaper: “Young farm worker wishes to marry beautiful girl with a tractor. Please send photo of the tractor!”
…For an Indian, it is a simple task to make things complex, but a complex task to make them simple.
Why have you written “Indian” after your name? Such things provoke me!

Osho,
Even though it seems that life for me is wonderful, I see this happening only on the surface. When I move a little deeper, my reality is of a restless being worrying about all sorts of things.
I find this circle boring where I am stuck now. Maybe it's because of my lack of meditation; still I don't seem to find the way in, deeper – even when the door is wide open.
Osho, I have heard you say, “Before you die, destroy the ego.” I am grateful to existence for everything, including this ego, but now it feels to be the right time to make room and be finished with it.
Osho, is this happening because I don't know meditation?
Nivedano, you will always remain crazy! What are you doing here if you don’t know meditation? You have perhaps got lost and forgotten your way, and somehow ended up here – because here everybody is doing meditation.
I have been telling you to be thankful to existence, but I have never told you to be thankful for the ego. Ego has not been given to you by existence. It is your own great creation! And now you feel that it is the right time to make room and be finished with it. Great idea! – but the problem is that you don’t know whether this is happening or not, because you don’t know meditation.
Nivedano, if it is happening then you must be knowing meditation without knowing it. There are many people who have qualities they are not aware of, but this is a very rare case! I have never heard of anybody who is in meditation and does not know that he is in meditation – because meditation is such a tremendous difference, such a qualitative difference from your ordinary life that you cannot miss it. It is almost impossible; that’s why I said you are going to remain crazy. This is possible only if you are crazy.
Contemplate over this small story:

A man decided one day that he was not paying enough attention to his family, so that evening he went home, kissed his children, gave flowers to his wife, shaved, showered and changed before dinner, and told lots of funny stories during the meal. Afterwards he whistled while he cleared the table, and insisted on washing and drying all the dishes. When he had finished he went into the living room and found his wife in tears.
“Everything has gone wrong today,” she sobbed. “The vacuum cleaner broke, Ernie threw his ball through the bedroom window, Polly fell and tore her best dress – and now you come home so drunk, you don’t know what you are doing!”

Nivedano, you are doing meditation. I look at you, and I feel you more grateful than anybody present here – more prayerful, more humble, more simple, more silent.
Just this morning, passing by Buddha Hall, I saw your little child. He looked so beautiful. I inquired whose child he is, and Nirvano told me, “He is Nivedano’s child.” For a moment I thought Nivedano must have looked exactly like this child – so simple…but he still looks just like a child whenever I look at him.
He may not be the same with others, that is almost certain, but as far as I am concerned, when I look at him, he looks so silent, so saintly…. Although he does not know what he is doing, he is doing well.

Osho,
Again on the subject of destroying ego, another question appears to be relevant to me right now, and that is the fact that wherever I go, sooner or later, trouble bubbles up. Usually it happens with authorities of some kind.
Osho, I wonder if this happens because, being unaware, I go on pushing the edges? Or is it an old habit of the ego? or…?
Nivedano, no matter where you go, there you are!

The bank robbers arrived just before closing time, and promptly ordered the few remaining customers, as well as the clerks and guards, to take their clothes off and lie face down on the floor.
One nervous blond pulled off her clothes and lay down on the floor, face up.
“Turn over, Maybelle,” whispered the girl lying beside her. “This is a stickup, not the office party.”

It must be just the old habit – you think it is the office party! If you feel that wherever you go sooner or later trouble bubbles up, just be a little aware! And don’t thank existence for the ego, because that is the cause of the whole trouble. If you are carrying your ego, wherever you go trouble is bound to bubble up.
Ego is the only trouble in the world.
If everybody in the world just for one hour decides to put the ego aside – just for one hour – there will be no trouble, no problem; there will be such great peace and silence and love that we have not known before. This whole planet has not known that.
But the ego is nourished on troubles. If it cannot create trouble, it will starve to death. It needs continuous nourishment, and that nourishment comes from trouble. So if you understand that the trouble is a pain in the neck, and you are tired of it…If you are not tired of it, then I am not saying you have to drop it; first get really tired, then there is no need for me to tell you to drop it. You will just drop it.
Trouble is your spiritual cancer; it is better to get rid of it. It is the only agony of the human soul, the only hell that really exists. And it is within your hands to get out of it.
I have told you a story that I love….

A Japanese king went to see Master Lin Chi. He touched the feet of the master and before he could say anything, Lin Chi said, “You idiot! You don’t know even manners.”
The king completely forgot for what he had come. He pulled out his sword, and Lin Chi laughed. He said, “You have forgotten your question. Now I remind you” – because the king had sent his prime minister before him to inform Lin Chi that he is coming and his question is, “What is hell and what is heaven?” Now, when the sword was just about to fall on his neck, Lin Chi said, “Wait a minute! This is the door of hell.”
The king was shocked. His hand stopped. He put back the sword in the sheath, and Lin Chi said, “That is the door of heaven. You had forgotten your question, but your prime minister told me. It was good that he told me before, otherwise you would have killed a poor man unnecessarily, and you would have suffered hell – because hell is not anywhere else but in your ego. When I said, ‘You idiot!’ what was the trouble? Why did you become so angry? Who was hurt? It is your ego that was hurt.”

If you don’t have any ego, it doesn’t matter whether somebody says you are an idiot or somebody says you are a genius. It does not matter…they are their opinions. You know who you are – you don’t depend on other people’s opinions. Your ego depends. Your ego keeps you a slave of the society in which you live. Ordinarily people think that their ego is something very precious. It is nothing but their slavery.
A man becomes independent and free and individual only when he has dropped his ego, when he is just a silent being, without any idea of “I” – just a pure silence…this silence. And if in this silence you look inward, you will not find any “I,” any ego, any self, but just a pure space.
This pure space is your spirituality.
This pure space is your enlightenment.
This pure space is your ultimate ecstasy.
The ego is preventing everything. Ego is making you a beggar, while you are an emperor of a great empire. Of course, that empire does not belong to the outside world; it is in your own being, but its vastness is as big as the universe itself.
Your ego is keeping you encaged, imprisoned. Don’t nourish it…and I am saying it because I know it is everybody’s possibility not to nourish the ego and to get out into the open sky.

One day at the London zoo two Jewish ladies, both blond and middle-aged, were standing in front of the cage of Guy the gorilla, and no doubt passing remarks on aspects of his physique.
Suddenly Guy, who was kept alone and whose life was very boring, was possessed by a tremendous urge. He gripped the bars before him, and, such was the force of his lust, wrenched them apart. He leaned out, seized the blonder of the two ladies, drew her into the cage and pulled the bars together. The hapless, screaming, blonder lady was dragged towards the inner sleeping quarters, screened from public view.
Some days later, recovering in a Harley Street clinic, the lady was visited by her friend.
“Oy Veh, Rachel,” the friend commiserated. Then, whispering hoarsely “…and tell me how you feel?”
Came the reply, “How do you think I feel?…he hasn’t written, he hasn’t phoned.”

Learn to laugh at your own ego. The moment you are gripped by your ego, relax and have a good laugh.
And don’t be worried…and I know you are crazy, you will not be worried what people think about you. But if you can laugh at your ego, that is the best way to kill it. Don’t be serious about your ego, because that is very nourishing food for the ego. That’s why all egoists are serious people.
The people who can laugh and enjoy and be playful are never egoists. It is on this particular point that I disagree with all the religions of the world. They have made people’s egos very strong by teaching them to be serious about life.
My effort is to erase the tremendous impact of millions of years of religious training. On the one hand they say, “Drop the ego,” and on the other hand they don’t allow the childlike playfulness…. On the one hand they go on insisting, “Drop the ego,” and on the other hand they don’t have any sense of humor.
No religion in the world has accepted a sense of humor as one of the fundamental religious qualities. I accept it, and I want that no religion can possibly exist in the future unless it has as a fundamental quality the sense of humor.
A religion without laughter…a God who cannot laugh and dance and sing is not worthy of being God. Send him to hell!

Osho,
Becoming more aware of myself, I have often been feeling more intensely “up and down,” and since being in the ashram this feeling has grown.
Whenever I ask some sannyasins “How do you feel?” the most popular answer is, “up and down.”
I can recognize a trick of the mind in this feeling, but a doubt arises: Isn't this (up and down) the shape of the vertical growth line and the rhythm of human beings, given that human life starts from an “up and down”?
Maurice came home from work early one day and found his wife in the arms of his best friend, Max.
He staggered back and said, “Max! I am married to her, so I have to do that. But you? You are a free man!”

Old Finkelstein was seventy-five when he decided to marry a young girl of twenty. His friends were scandalized, and one of them said, “Finkelstein, do you realize that a man of your age having sex with a young girl could be very dangerous – even fatal?”
Finkelstein considered for a while, then shrugged and said, “Oh, well, if she dies, she dies!”

Life is such…it is up and down! It is up and down everywhere, not only here. And the moment it stops being up and down, you are dead! So let it go as up as possible and as down as possible…. The higher it goes, the deeper it goes, the better. Why are you worried because everybody says, “Up and down”? They know…and you know also.

Paddy was known for his foul language by everyone in his congregation. The parson took him aside on Sunday and said, “Every time you swear you must give five dollars to the nearest stranger. That will cure you soon enough.”
As Paddy left the preacher, he stubbed his toe and then silently handed the five dollars to a woman just entering the church.
“Okay,” whispered the woman, “But can you wait until after the service?”

============================================================

Osho,
Is the devil really male?
Deva Prachurya, it is a beautiful question because the women’s liberation movement is talking about God being a woman; they have started pronouncing him not he but she. But none of them has thought about the devil, which is a counterpart. They both exist together, just like light and darkness, life and death.
Both are hypothetical. God does not exist the way you exist and the trees exist and the mountains exist; it is just a hypothesis. And because of the hypothesis of God, theologians have had to create his other pole, the other polarity, the devil. So the devil becomes darkness and God becomes light.
The Hindu Upanishads have one of the most beautiful prayers, perhaps the most beautiful in the whole world of religion. I love its poetry, but I don’t agree with its philosophy. The prayer is very small, but very pregnant with meaning and significance. It says, “Lead me from darkness to light” – tamso ma jyotir gamaya. It says, “Lead me from untruth to the truth” – asto ma sad gamaya. And in the final stage it says, “Lead me from death to deathlessness” – mrityor ma amritam gamaya.
It is sheer poetry, you cannot improve upon it – but it is utterly false, because darkness and light are one phenomenon. You cannot go from darkness to light, because light is nothing but a little less darkness, and darkness is nothing but a little less light. It is a difference of degrees. Neither can you go from untruth to truth – the same differentiation of degrees is there. Every untruth has something true about it, and every truth expressed has to join hands with untruth.
And you cannot go from death to eternal life, because death is part of life. It is not against it – it is the very crescendo of life. They both exist together. A person who cannot die, cannot live either. Life exists with death almost like two wings of a bird: you cannot have the bird flying in the sky across the sun with one wing. Life and death are just like your two legs – you cannot move with one leg.
Existence is dialectical: it always has its opposite. Without the opposite, it will not exist. Because man created God as the very holy of the holiest, he had to create a devil. It was just an absolute philosophical necessity! The devil is the counterpart of God. You will be surprised to know…your name is Deva Prachurya. Deva means divine, and devil also comes from the same root; it also means divine.
But both are hypothetical. I have no objection if God is a woman, but certainly I am immensely happy if the devil is a woman! God may be, may not be, but the devil is certainly a woman; otherwise for such a long eternity the devil could not have been nagging God continuously! From whom is God escaping? Where is he hiding, and from whom? Why has he not the guts to come out, at least once in a while, to remind people that he is still alive? The woman does not allow it.
So I am not certain about God, but, Deva Prachurya, woman is certainly a devil – and vice-versa!

Mrs. Markovitz got a knock on the door.
“It is your husband,” shouted her neighbor, “he is face down in the swimming pool. I think he is drowned.”
“Is today Wednesday?” asked Mrs. Markovitz.
“Yes,” said her neighbor, “it is, but…”
“What time is it?” Mrs Markovitz asked.
“Eleven o’clock, but…” replied her neighbor.
“Then don’t worry about a thing,” said Mrs. Markovitz, “the pool man will be here in an hour!”

The husband has drowned…but the wife and the husband are the greatest enemies in the world; psychologists call them “intimate enemies.” They have always been! It is a very recent development of insight.
God being a woman will create trouble. Then the devil will be a man – because they have to be polar opposites. Perhaps the women’s liberation movement has not thought about the implications of what they are doing. I would like God to be the man and tortured by the devil, the woman, rather than vice-versa, because good can be tortured by bad, but bad cannot be tortured by good. But the question simply has not come up around the world – and women are insisting that God is a woman.
It is really strange that nobody has bothered about the devil, who is a more important person than God. God is only a VIP, the devil is a VVIP! God may have created the world, but the devil is running it – and running it so devilishly and so perfectly.
Genghis Khan, Tamerlane, Nadirshah, Adolf Hitler, Joseph Stalin, Benito Mussolini, Ronald Reagan – who do you think they represent? Certainly not God! They represent the devil, and they have made our history. They are the people who go on creating more and more evil in the world.
Friedrich Nietzsche has declared, “God is dead and man is free.” His statement is incomplete; he has forgotten about the devil. God may be dead – most probably he cannot manage to survive the devil for so long – but the devil is there. And unless the devil is also dead, man cannot be free.
Man’s real problem is not God; that poor fellow has never been seen after those first six days when he created the world. Since then nobody knows where he is – whether he is sick, or got so tired of creating the world in six days that the seventh day he rested…that is allowed. But what happened on Monday? On office days you should be back. Since then he has been on holiday…it is an eternity. Most probably he died.
But the devil is still alive, and shows himself again and again. You cannot conceive of Adolf Hitler in any other way than an incarnation of the devil; you cannot think of Nadirshah and his great company, Tamerlane and Genghis Khan, as anything other than incarnations of the devil.
I remember one case…Nadirshah attacked India – and he was a man who enjoyed killing people so greatly that his whole life he was killing and killing. One night he asked his soldiers to bring the most beautiful woman of the area, so they brought a prostitute from a nearby village. In India, prostitutes are a little different than in the West. In the West they are only sex objects. In the East they are artists, dancers, singers; their being sex objects is secondary.
She danced, and Nadirshah was very happy. The night was almost coming to an end when Nadirshah said, “Now I want to go to sleep, you can go back.”
He gave immense rewards to the woman, but the woman said, “It is dark outside. With so much money, so many diamonds…I am a woman and alone, and the path goes through a dark forest – I cannot go.”
Nadirshah told his soldiers, “You go ahead of her, and go on burning everything that you find – forest, village, anything. Make it a light.”
Nobody has made light that way – just a small torch would have done. But Nadirshah had such a devilish mind: he burned seven villages and the whole forest to make it almost look like day. He told the prostitute, “Now you can go. And you will remember that you had come to see not some Tom, Dick, Harry; you had come to see the great emperor, Nadir Shah. He can make the night into day.” Thousands of villagers were burned alive. You cannot say such a man represents God in any way.
The devil is spread all over your history; even today, the devil is ruling you. The devil is a politician, has always been a politician. God is a nice guy – if he exists – very gentlemanly, has remained almost anonymous, almost a nobody. If one has to think about who is more important, indubitably it is the devil.
I would like him to be a woman, because the woman has many devilish qualities. But then God will have to be a man, because the polarity…both cannot be women, both cannot be men. If both were women, there would have been constant struggle and fight and jealousy and envy. If both were men, there would have been homosexuality and AIDS. So that is not acceptable; they have to be polar opposites.
My feeling is that the devil is man and God is woman – at least he has been functioning as very womanly. The devil is very aggressive, and God goes on retreating.
So your question is very important theologically – although in reality they both don’t exist. Hypotheses cannot be male or female: two plus two is four – do you think it is male or female? It is just neutral, it has no genital difference.
God and the devil are just theological hypotheses. It simply shows the weakness of the theologians that they could not manage the world without false hypotheses to support their systems. God they needed to create the world – without ever bothering who created God. Their fundamental idea is that without somebody creating, nothing can be created; that’s why they have accepted God as the creator of the world. But why stop with God? What happened to the original thesis?
The thesis was that nothing can be created without a creator. Who created God? According to all religions…the question has remained unanswered. They know that if they say God A was created by God B they will get into more trouble…then God C and God D, and the whole alphabet. Still, when they reach XYZ, nothing will be solved – who created God Z?
In fact they have started from a very wrong premise. Existence is intrinsically self-generated. It has always been here, so the question of creation does not arise. And it will always be here, so the question of destruction does not arise. It may pass through many phases of evolution, but it will remain.
If God can be dropped, there is no need for the devil. They are a married couple – because nobody has seen either of them, it is very difficult to say who is man and who is woman. But the devil seems to have been functioning around the world for centuries; after those six days, he has been in charge.
Most probably, if you want hypotheses also to be divided as male and female, then he seems to be the male, because he has been working all along…and God must be a housewife – that’s why you don’t see her any more in the marketplace. But the devil you will find anywhere. You don’t have to look for him; he is looking for you!
I am more interested that you get rid of both – whoever they may be, male or female. Getting rid of both of them, existence becomes absolute freedom; man attains dignity and self respect.
The very idea of God and devil makes you either the slave of one or the slave of another. The sinners are the servants of the devil, and the saints are the servants of God. But to be a servant, to be a slave, is against human dignity.
Hence I say unto you: God is dead, the devil is dead. Their death is very necessary for you to be alive. If they are alive, you are dead. Then you are imprisoned from both sides. Then man has to do a strange game continuously: he works for the devil, and worships God – because you have to keep both of them happy.

An old man was dying and suddenly he started worshipping first God, repeating his name, and then the name of the devil. His family was aghast! They said, “Are you mad? In the last moments of your life you are remembering the devil?”
He said, “I don’t want to take any chance…who knows where I am going and whom I am going to meet? And it costs nothing, so I will remember both. Whoever meets me, I have remembered him, and if nobody meets me, there is no problem. If both meet me, then too there is no problem. I am calculating every possibility.”
Man is crushed between the devil and God, between good and evil. I want man not to be crushed, not to be enslaved, but to be an individual in his own right, free. And out of his freedom, and out of his awareness, he should act – not according to what God wants.
I have told you the story of the ten commandments…

When God made the world, he went to the Babylonians and said, “Would you like to have a commandment?”
They said, “First we would like to see what it is.”
And he said, “Thou shalt not commit adultery.”
The Babylonians said, “What would we do? We don’t want any commandment, please forgive us.”
He went to the Egyptians, and he went to other races. Nobody was willing, because everybody asked, “What is the commandment?” And they said, “We don’t want to be encaged in any commandment. We want to live on our own.”
Finally he reached Moses and asked him, “Do you want to have a commandment?”
Moses asked, “How much does it cost?”
This is a rare question! God had gone all around the world…and it was only Moses who asked the price, the first thing. God said, “It costs nothing.”
Moses said, “Then I will have ten!” If it does not cost anything, why not have ten? – that’s how there are ten commandments.

Every religion has created its own commandments – strange, unnatural – out of fear or out of greed. But they have made this poor humanity that you see around the world.
Even the richest man is so poor because he does not have the freedom to act according to his own consciousness. He has to act according to principles given by somebody else, and one does not know whether that man was a con-man, a fraud, a poet, a dreamer. There is no evidence…because so many people have claimed that they are incarnations of God, that they are messengers of God, that they are prophets of God, and they all bring different messages. Either God is mad or these people are simply lying. Most probably they are lying…!
It gives you a great egoistic feeling if you are a prophet, a messiah, an avatara, a tirthankara – somebody special, not just an ordinary human being. Then you can dominate. This is a different kind of politics. Wherever there is domination, there is politics.
The politician is dominating because of physical force – his armies, his armaments, his nuclear weapons. The religious prophets, messiahs, saviors, avataras are dominating you spiritually. Their domination is more dangerous – they are far greater politicians. They are dominating your life not only from outside but from inside. They have become your inside, they have become your morality, they have become your conscience, they have become your very spiritual being.
From inside they go on dominating you, saying what is right, what is wrong. You have to follow them, otherwise you start feeling guilty, and guilt is one of the greatest spiritual diseases. If you follow them, you start feeling unnatural, neurotic, perverted, because you are not following your nature. If you follow your nature, you are not following your prophets and your saviors.
All these religions have created for man a situation in which he cannot be at ease, he cannot enjoy life, he cannot live it in its totality. So my suggestion is, it is better to let both guys be dead. And what does it matter? – when one is dead, whether he is man or woman does not matter. A dead woman is not dangerous, neither is a dead man. They are not alive.
Let humanity be free from all these old superstitions which have dominated so badly, and distorted human nature so immensely. You can see the humanity that is the result. You say that a tree is known by its fruits. If that is true – and that is true – then your whole past of prophets, saviors, avataras, tirthankaras, God, devil, should be judged by the humanity that you find today.
This insane humanity – miserable, suffering, full of anger, rage, hate…If this is the result of all your religions, of all your leaders – whether political or religious – then it is better to let God and the devil die. With God and the devil gone, political leaders and religious leaders will not have any support; they will be the next to die.
I want man to be politically free, religiously free, free in every dimension to function out of his own still small voice, out of his own consciousness. And that will be a beautiful world, a real revolution.

Osho,
I feel so blessed to have this opportunity to float in your ocean of silence. Does my wanting more block my availability to receive it?
I am sorry to say to you that your wanting more is certainly going to block your availability to receive the bliss that you are receiving without expectations. This is a simple, basic rule.
Jesus says, “Ask and it shall be given to you.” I say, “Don’t ask, otherwise it will be not given to you; not only that, whatever is given to you will be taken away.” Jesus says, “Knock and the doors shall be opened,” and I say unto you, “Knock, and even if the doors are open, they will be locked!”
Jesus says, “Seek and ye shall find,” and I say unto you, “Seek, and you have missed forever. Don’t seek, and you are it – there is nothing else to find.”
The bliss that you are finding here is not coming from outside; it has been within you always – you just have never been in the company of blissful, madly divine people. Seeing so many people flowering, suddenly you have blossomed.
Blissfulness is contagious. That’s my whole idea of creating small oases around the world, where people can find blissful people all around. The very presence of those blissful people will transform them. Intrinsically everyone has the capacity, but they are always surrounded by miserable people so they never become aware that there is a possibility of being blissful. Everybody is miserable and it looks a little weird and awkward and embarrassing: when everybody is miserable and you are enjoying, one feels guilty. You have to be part of the company you have chosen.
The whole world can be blissful because everybody carries it within himself. But there are a few points to be remembered, and the most important is: don’t ask for it, don’t knock for it, don’t seek it, don’t expect it – otherwise you will become closed. Remain available and open, and it comes…and it comes in abundance.

Paddy drove through the red light and smashed into a car driven by Father O’Hagan. The car turned over three times and the priest was thrown from the vehicle into the gutter. Paddy rushed over and said, “I am terribly sorry, Father.”
“Saints above!” said the shaken priest, “You almost killed me.”
“Here,” said Paddy, “I have got a small bottle of whisky. Take some and you will feel a lot better.”
Father O’Hagan took a couple of large gulps and then continued his tirade: “What were you doing? You nearly launched me into eternity.”
“I am sorry, Father,” said Paddy. “Take a few more sips and it will ease your nerves.”
The priest took another large gulp and almost finished the bottle, which he offered to Paddy saying, “Why don’t you have a drink?”
“No thanks, Father,” said Paddy, “I will just sit here and wait for the police to arrive!”

Just be a little alert, that’s all! If you can learn only one lesson, that of being conscious, blissfulness will arrive. And it is natural – I can understand – when it comes, you want more. But you have to be alert not to want more. On the contrary, be thankful for that which has come, and more will be coming – that is absolutely certain. I say it on my own experience, not according to any scripture, or according to any religion, or according to any saint.
Don’t expect! Whatever you get, be grateful for it. Instead of expecting more say, “This is too much! I don’t deserve it, I have not earned it.” Bow down to existence in deep gratitude, and you will feel flowers of bliss and benediction showering on you from all sides.
Once you have learned the simple rule, you will never expect – and you will always be getting more and more. Just remain available, keep the doors and windows of your heart open.

Osho,
For a few days my heart has been jumping all around the ashram and it feels like I am losing control. Osho, how far can I go?
Nirgrantha, you have already gone too far if your heart is jumping all around the ashram! And you are still saying, “It feels like I am losing control.” You have lost control long ago; otherwise how can your heart go on jumping all around the ashram?
You forget all about control. This place is not for people who control; this place is for people who let their heart dance wherever it wants to dance!
Remember a famous proverb: Talent is what you possess, genius is what possesses you. You cannot control genius; you can control talents. Here we are creating the possibility for your sleeping genius to be awake. Once your genius is awake, you are going to be possessed, you will not be in control – and there is no need to be in control. The sky is vast, millions of stars are moving without crashing, and no traffic control! Here I see thousands of hearts dancing, running – no traffic control! Nature manages itself so perfectly that if you don’t disturb, everything goes all right – and very smoothly.

A man dressed as Adolf Hitler visited a psychiatrist. “You can see I have no problems,” he said. “I have the greatest army in the world, all the money I ever need and every conceivable luxury you can imagine.”
“Then what seems to be the trouble?” asked the doctor.
“It is my wife,” said the man, “she thinks she is Mrs. Jones.”

So just remember one thing: you can be dancing all around joyously, just don’t get caught up with a wife, otherwise she will control you! You have lost control – and here in my place there are great women controllers! The moment they see that some fellow is getting out of control, they immediately control. So avoid a wife. Once in a while you can dance with any woman, but remain free.
Control is not my message; control is repression. Nirgrantha…I have given you the name Nirgrantha; do you understand its meaning? One who is absolutely free – without any complexes, without any chains, without any bondage. And you are asking me about control…?
I had explained to you when I gave you the name to drop all chains, drop all bondages. Just be yourself and do whatsoever pleases you. Just remember one thing: don’t interfere into anybody’s life, and don’t allow anybody else to interfere in your life. This is true humanity – authentic, honest, pure.

It was a rough ocean crossing, and Mr. Levensky was suffering the tortures of sea-sickness. During one of the more unsettled periods, he was leaning over the rail retching miserably, when a kindly steward patted him on the shoulder. “I know sir,” said the steward, “that it seems awful, but remember – no man ever died of sea-sickness.”
Mr. Levensky lifted his green face to the steward and said, “For heaven’s sake man, don’t say that. It is the wonderful hope of dying that is keeping me alive!”

It is a very strange life!

“Be careful,” the doctor told the relatives of an elderly man who was dying.
One by one they went up to him, “You look so much brighter today,” exclaimed his daughter.
“You must be on the mend,” said his son.
“I have not seen you look so healthy for years,” said his wife.
The old chap opened his eyes and said, “Thank you for your kind words; it is good to know that I am going to die cured!”

Rather than dying cured, why not live cured?
You are cured if your heart is jumping – I have never heard of any dead man’s heart jumping all around the ashram. We have three enlightened dead men in the ashram. This day is in their memory, and even on this day, they are not here! Dead men, even if they want to jump, cannot jump. So while you are alive, enjoy it to its fullest. Don’t be worried about being tired or anything, because finally in your grave you will have enough rest!
Live a life of immense intensity and totality so that in your grave you don’t toss and turn, because there is not much space! Don’t miss this moment in thinking about control. In graveyards you can think about all these great things, and nobody will prevent you. You can keep control, you will have to keep control! You can follow all ten commandments, you will have to follow – how can you commit adultery in a grave?
Before that, it is good to live as joyously and as freely as possible, because who knows when you will be coming back to this beautiful earth, to these beautiful people? Even today you will not find a gathering of such beautiful people.
This is my only crime: I am condemned all over the world for simply one reason, that I am making people live totally and intensely, not bothering about their commandments, not bothering about their holy scriptures, not bothering about their gods and their devils, their heaven and their hell.
All those things are to be thought about and contemplated in your grave. You will have enough time, almost the whole of eternity. So lie down there and be philosophical, be moral, don’t commit any sin. But right now, don’t be bothered about all these superstitions.
Only one thing has to be remembered, and that is to be as conscious as possible, because that will make you dance rightly, in right places, with right people! Your consciousness will not allow you to jump on somebody else’s toes. That is the only sin.
According to me, to interfere in somebody’s life is the only sin, and the only virtue is not to interfere in anybody’s life. Let him be himself, and let you be yourself…your freedom.
This is, according to me, the authentic religiousness.
This is the only holy pilgrimage:
From here to here – you don’t have to go anywhere.
From now to now – you don’t have to travel in time or space.
You are in a good spirit; don’t lose the track of it. Control is an old habit which every child is being taught from the very childhood: control – control everything – discipline, behave.
Now you are no more a child, and I am not your father – I am not even your uncle! Throw all control, throw all licenses, throw all boundaries. Life is so short, don’t destroy it in controls and boundaries and mannerisms and etiquette and all kinds of nonsense.
Rejoice! I repeat, rejoice – and rejoice totally. And if your heart is dancing, give it full energy. Everybody’s heart is dancing. This is a place of dance, of song, of laughter. And I say this is the only kaaba, the only holy place in the world today. All holy places have become unholy, they have become prisons for man in the name of morality, control, discipline.
This is a small place with a vast territory of independence, freedom. The whole sky is yours – even the sky is not the limit.

============================================================

Osho,
Give me some sutras to meditate on.
Devageet…Devageet is a dental doctor, but lately he is turning into a philosopher! Just today he has sent a telegram to Maharishi Mahesh Yogi, saying “Drop the idea of saving the world through transcendental meditation. I have a better suggestion….” His suggestion is “transdental medication”! And I think that if the world can be saved by yogic hopping, then there seems to be no problem why it cannot be saved by transdental medication.
He is asking for some sutras to meditate on, but sutras are serious, and meditation does not need any sutra. Meditation is a state where absolute emptiness exists, not even a sutra; there is not any possibility of any object. A philosopher never meditates, a philosopher contemplates. So I can give sutras for contemplation, but not for meditation because that will be absolutely wrong.
Meditation simply means silence – absolute, unconditional serenity of the heart, of the mind, of the being…no stirring of any kind. Even a sutra is enough of a disturbance. You can contemplate on a sutra; sutra is Sanskrit for maxim.

The first…a successful man: one who earns more than his wife can spend.
And second, a successful woman: one who finds such a man!
Third: A jealous man always finds more than he is looking for.
Fifth: Some minds are like concrete – mixed-up and permanently set.
Sixth: The first half of life consists of the capacity to enjoy without the chance. The last half consists of the chance without the capacity.
Seventh: What Pune really needs is a vegetarian mosquito.
Eighth: The man who admits he is wrong is wise. The man who gives in when he is right is married!
Ninth: The rich get richer and the poor get children.
Tenth: Middle age is when it takes longer to rest than to get tired.
Eleventh: You never know how many friends you have until you rent a cottage in Pune.
Twelfth: You can’t tell how deep a puddle is until you step in it.
Thirteenth: Virtue is its own punishment.
Fourteenth: By the time a man is wise enough to watch his step, he is too old to go anywhere.
Fifteenth: Prayer must never be answered. If it is, it ceases to be prayer and becomes a correspondence.
Fifteenth: An asylum for the sane would be empty in this world.
You don’t get it! You belong to this world!
Sixteenth: It is always the best policy to speak the truth unless you are, of course, an exceptionally good liar.
Seventeenth: He who does not mind a big belly will hardly mind anything else.

Devageet, contemplate as much as you can, but it will not lead you anywhere. Anything that can bring you some light, some conclusion, is not contemplation, it is meditation.
It has been an old fallacy that meditation also needs an object to meditate upon. The very word ‘meditation’ is wrong because it gives the idea that you have to meditate upon something. Meditation simply means that you don’t have anything left to meditate upon. All is empty: there is no object, no chanting, no mantra, no sutra…just pure emptiness. And suddenly all your energy of awareness turns upon yourself, without any effort on your part.
And the turning of the energy of awareness upon yourself is the ultimate experience of life, of light, of everything that is really valuable; everything that cannot be purchased but can be attained, everything that is not a commodity anybody else can give you but is something that you already have – but you have never looked inside.
Looking inside is meditation – just pure looking inwards, a turning of the eyes inwards one hundred and eighty degrees, and you have arrived home. Not a single step has to be taken, because you are not going anywhere; you are simply coming from here to here. You are already there where you need to be, just you are not aware. Hence, meditation can be called awareness, watchfulness, alertness, witnessing – but it is not thinking. Contemplation is thinking; it will not lead you anywhere.
No philosopher has reached to any conclusion that solves the ultimate question of life, Who am I? But you are not to think about it…what will you think about it?
There are many people who have followed Maharishi Ramana. His teaching was very simple – he was a simple man, uneducated, not learned. He had escaped from his home when he was only seventeen. He escaped because his father died. When the whole family was weeping and crying, and the neighbors were preparing to take the dead body to the funeral pyre, nobody noticed that Ramana had disappeared.
The experience of the death of his father became a tremendous revolution in Ramana’s mind. He was only seventeen, the only son of a poor family, and he escaped to the mountains. He remained his whole life on the mountain of Arunachal where he did nothing but just sit and watch inside. He never asked anybody anything. He had no master, he had nobody to guide him, but just sitting silently watching his own mind, he transcended his mind and he came to know himself.
And by knowing himself he came to know the ultimate bliss – the ecstasy that surrounded Gautam Buddha, the enlightenment that was radiating from Mahavira, the joy, the dance of all those who have awakened. So whoever was asking him, “What are we supposed to do?” he had only one answer his whole life: “Meditate on ‘Who am I?’”
But people have misunderstood him…even such a simple statement. He was not saying, “Contemplate,” he was not saying, “Think about ‘Who am I?’” – what can you think? Either you know or you don’t know; thinking is impossible. What will you think? If you start you will think, “This is my name, this is my country, this is my family, this is my race, this is my caste, this is my profession….” But what will you find by doing this? You will not find out who you are. These things are all on the periphery.
But Ramana was not a master in the sense that he could explain to people that watching the mind, the whole process of the mind, the whole traffic of thoughts…Even “Who am I?” is a thought; don’t get stuck to it. Just watch that thought too, and a moment comes when all thinking disappears – just by watching. Just as you bring light into a dark room and darkness disappears, as you bring watchfulness to your mind, mind disappears.
And the disappearance of the mind is the beginning of knowing yourself.
This is the highest peak of consciousness, and unless a man achieves it, he has wasted his life in trivia. He lived only in name; in fact he vegetated. He may have been a very rich vegetable…They say there are only two kinds of vegetables, cabbage and cauliflower; the cabbage category is uneducated, and the cauliflower is a cabbage with college degrees. But there is not much difference.
If you really want to live and not to vegetate, meditation is the only way; and meditation means no-mind…just silence.

Osho,
You have spoken to us about being in the world yet not of it. How come you have not spoken to us about being in the commune yet not of it?
I have spoken about being in the world but not of it. A commune is not a community, a commune is not a world, a commune is not a society. A commune is a very friendly gathering of people who live in the world but are not of the world.
A commune is not an organization, it is simply the gathering of individuals. It does not take away anybody’s individuality. It does not destroy your dignity, your pride, your self-respect. On the contrary, it gives you dignity, respect, love: it accepts you as you are. It does not demand that you should be somebody else, then only will you be thought worthy; it does not ask you to be a saint. It simply loves you as you are. That’s why in the commune there is no question at all…
How can I say to you, “Be in the commune but don’t belong to it”? The commune is basically individuals who have learned to be in the world and not of the world. That statement is true about the world, because the world tries to strangle you, the world tries to make you a prisoner in a thousand and one ways. The commune gives you total freedom to be yourself; there is no question of belonging to it. Each individual exists as an individual, not as a part of the commune.
In the larger world each individual is only a cog in the wheel, he does not exist as himself. He is only a number, just like in the armies. A soldier dies…on the board of the office appears the notice that “number sixteen has died.” In the army names are not recognized, but only numbers.
You will be surprised what the psychology is behind it; there is tremendous meaning. If your name is recognized, then you have a wife, you have children, you have old parents, an old father, an old mother, who must be waiting for you, who must be praying that you come back home alive. If you have a name, you are irreplaceable; but if you are just a number – number sixteen…
Numbers don’t have wives, they don’t have children, they don’t have parents – nobody is waiting for them. In fact numbers can be replaced, but names cannot be, individuals cannot be. Hence for centuries armies have been changing people into numbers. So when somebody looks at the board – how many numbers have died – he does not feel anything about their wives, their children, their father, their mother, their friends, all their hopes, all their prayers…. It is a very cunning strategy to deceive people. And these numbers can be immediately replaced by other numbers; somebody else will become number sixteen. There is no problem in replacing numbers.
Society also, in a more subtle way, makes you just a part; it never allows you total freedom to be yourself. You are a husband, you are a wife, you are a father, you are a brother…you are never yourself, you are somebody else. There are a thousand and one expectations from you to be fulfilled; those are your chains. There are responsibilities and duties; those are your prisons.
In a commune you don’t have a duty, you don’t have a responsibility. You don’t have to be somebody else to be worthy, to be respected, to be prestigious. Just as you are, in your utter nudeness, you are accepted, loved. Your very being is enough, nothing more is needed.
You don’t ask a roseflower to be somebody else, and you don’t ask a lotus to be somebody else. A marigold is as beautiful as the rose. The world would be poorer if there were no marigolds, and only roses. The world is richer because more variety is there. Each individual in a commune is unique; in the world he is just a carbon copy. In the commune, everybody is original; in the world, only a true copy.
The world expects you to follow, imitate – everything others are doing you should do. The commune does not ask anything of you; you should simply do what is spontaneous to you, what you feel like doing. You should allow yourself absolute freedom for your potential to blossom. Hence I have not talked about the other part of your question, because that will be against the very idea of the commune.
A commune is not an alternative society.
A commune is a brotherhood of rebellious souls.

Bernie was more than a little annoyed when a neighbor telephoned at 3:00 a.m. and complained, “Your dog is barking so loudly that I can’t sleep!” The neighbor hung up before he could reply.
The following morning at 3:00 a.m. Bernie called his neighbor and said, “I don’t have a dog!”

This is your world – utterly insane! That’s why I say that unfortunately you have to be in it. Be, but don’t belong to it; keep yourself as much unimpressed, uninfluenced by others as possible. Keep your originality; don’t lose it in the crowd.

The young bride was inconsolable, in spite of the fact that her dead, seventy-five-year-old husband had left her ten million dollars in his will. Her friends tried to make her understand: “You are so young,” they said. “You have a great life ahead, and ten million dollars! He had to die sooner or later.”
“You don’t understand,” she sobbed. “He was the greatest lover. We lived next door to the church and he used to make love to me by the sound of the church bells – ding-dong, ding-dong. And he would be alive today if it wasn’t for that damn fire truck!”

That’s why I say: Don’t belong to this world. Be in it, but be alert that you don’t get lost in the madness that is all over the earth.

Old man Finkelstein, aged eighty-five, went to a sperm bank to make a deposit. The young woman at the reception was skeptical. “Are you sure that you want to do this?” she asked.
“Yes,” said old Finkelstein. “I feel it is my duty to give something from myself to the world.”
The woman gave him a jar and directed him to a room down the hall. When thirty minutes had passed and he did not return, the girl began to worry that he might have had a heart attack. But just then the old man came out of the room and approached the woman.
“Listen,” he said, “I tried it with one hand, then I tried it with two hands, then I got it up and hit it on the sink, then I ran warm water on it, then cold water over it, and I still can’t get the lid of the jar open!”

It is better not to be part of this insane world! Remain sane. Insanity is normal in the world – that’s why you don’t detect it. Once you understand that it is the normal insanity, and you start looking deeply into it, you will be immensely surprised that you are living in a big madhouse.
The commune is a rebellion, it is not a revolution. A revolution creates an alternative society. For example, what happened in Russia was a revolution; it created an alternative society. But that society is as insane as any other society; perhaps it has different names for its insanity, but nothing has changed.
Seventy years after the revolution, people are standing in queues just to get bread – even today. Seventy years ago they revolted against the czar to make a new world where nobody will be poor, but what actually happened is that they have created a world where nobody is rich. They have brought equality to the world, that’s certainly true: they have made everybody equally poor. People in Russia, which is one sixth of the whole world, are living in a concentration camp.
I have been in America, and my sannyasins in Russia are trying for me to enter into Russia some day. Today they must have gathered to celebrate – they have informed me that they will be gathering at the same time as we are. They have to gather in basements. They have to read books silently, “underground,” so nobody can hear.
The KGB, the Intelligence Department, has caught hold of twenty sannyasins and has interrogated them continuously for weeks, harassed them just because they had my books. They have taken away all their books, and they were trying to force them to tell who the other sannyasins are. And because they were not telling, they were harassed continuously in the middle of the night; they would be called to the police station and the whole night continuous interrogation…and this is revolution!
Man has become even more a slave than he was ever before. Man was not such a slave even in the days of the czar before the revolution; society was not so dominant and so afraid of people and their freedom.
America makes claims of democracy. I lived there for five years, and there is no democracy at all. It is one of the most hypocritical societies; it is deceiving the whole world in the name of democracy. It is another kind of dictatorship. But the whole world is like this….
I have been refused entry by twenty-one countries. Even before I had applied for a tourist visa, the German parliament decided and ordered all the borders and all the airports that if I try to enter into the country from anywhere I am not allowed…not only that I am not allowed in the country, my airplane has not to be allowed to land at any airport.
What kind of world have we made?
I have not done any harm to those people. I have never been in their country. And what harm can I do if my airplane just lands for refueling in their international airport? – and why do you call it an international airport? In what way can I affect their morality, their religion, their tradition?
I was never aware that people can be so afraid of rational thinking, of intelligent behavior. I had never thought that the whole world lives under different kinds of superstitions. They are so afraid that somebody may create an upheaval – at least in the younger generation – by making them aware of their superstitions.
But to live under superstitions is to live blindly. That’s why I say: don’t belong to this world. This is not the world for human beings, this is not the world for intelligent people; this is an ugly world created by millions of years of superstition and darkness, exploited by the religious leaders, politicians and so-called moralists. They have all proved to be parasites – and nothing else.
A commune is not an alternative society. A commune is simply a brotherhood without any organization, without any hierarchy. Nobody is your religious leader and nobody is your political leader. Everybody is simply allowed to be his natural self, without any judgment and without any evaluation.

Osho,
I found out that my two basic interests are sex and meditation. Am I doing right? I want to be your favorite disciple. What to do? Which is the worst question to ask you?
You have asked it! You say your interests are two: sex and meditation. If sex is your interest, forget all about meditation. When you get tired of sex, fed up with it, then the same energy that was involved in sex can be used for meditation. But you can’t have both together – that will be like riding on two horses together. Either you have sex, or you have meditation.
But one thing you have to understand: you cannot have meditation unless you have transcended sex. But transcendence should not be understood in the old ways as repression. Transcendence is experience, so much experience that you don’t think anymore about attraction, infatuation.
Sex simply drops like dry leaves from the trees.
It is not that you have to make some effort. If you have to make some effort to drop it, it will remain with you. And if it is there, meditation is impossible; it won’t let you be silent. It is one of the most torturous biological slaveries. It is good to get rid of it by experiencing it with totality and intensity – don’t think of meditation at all. Sex, lived totally, will bring you to meditation; and then meditation will be very easy, because there will be no biological pull against it. Your so-called priests, monks, saints, cannot meditate.
Even a man like Mahatma Gandhi, at the age of seventy, was having sexual dreams. This was the result of a whole life of repression. And finally at the age of seventy-five he started to sleep with young naked girls.
His disciples, who had become the rulers of the country – he was the greatest spiritual and political leader, both – tried to hide this fact; the masses of the country should not know about it. They protected him in every way. The news should not become common; people should not come to know about it. There was a danger that he might lose all his saintliness. People have respected him, followed him…and before his death, he will see himself fallen, failed.
They tried to persuade him to stop this, but he had his explanations and excuses. He used to tell them, “This is an experiment to check on my celibacy – whether I am really celibate or not.”
Mind is very cunning. Nobody in the world has ever checked celibacy this way before. If you are celibate, I don’t think you will not know whether you are or not, whether the idea of the other sex comes to your mind or not. You don’t need any test. You yourself will be enough to know whether your mind is visited by sexual ideas, dreams, fantasies, or not.
But the reality was he was tortured…and the reason was not that he was insincere; he was a very sincere man, but he followed a wrong path sincerely. Always remember: just sincerity is not going to help. You can be very honest, very sincere, very arduous…but if you are on a wrong path all your sincerity will lead you not to the goal you wanted to reach, but exactly to its opposite.
Gandhi could never understand what meditation is, and that was one of his greatest failures. He could not understand that you can be free from any desire only if you have lived it completely, entirely. If something has remained unlived it is going to haunt you.
You are saying sex and meditation are your two basic interests. Please have one basic interest! And sex is absolutely first, because that is your biological bondage. You have to get free of it, and the way to get free of it is not to fight with it – that’s what religious people have been doing for centuries. They have not succeeded.
Not a single person has succeeded in transcending sex by fighting it, by repressing it. Live it! – and don’t live it with guilt, don’t live it as if it is something wrong, it is a sin. It is not. It is neither a sin nor a crime, it is an absolutely natural way of reproducing. You are not responsible for it.
You are produced through sex. Your every cell is sexual. Nature has found a way to go on reproducing life in new forms; sex is simply a methodology which nature has chosen. You cannot fight with nature. Nature is vast and tremendously strong, but you can get beyond it, and the way beyond is through it – not by fighting, but by understanding, experiencing…. And the more you become experienced, capable of understanding, it is absolutely easy to move your energy into the second stage of evolution: from sex to meditation.
Meditation is very simple if sex has been lived completely without any fear, any repression, any guilt. My own understanding is that by the time…just as at the age of fourteen you become interested in sex, if you live perfectly and totally and sincerely – religiously – your sexual life, by the age of forty-two you will be out of it.
Life has seven year cycles. If you take as an average seventy years, it has ten cycles of seven years. The first seven years you are absolutely innocent – you are just as a saint should be. Your second seven years are a preparation for sex; slowly, slowly, the snake of sex starts uncoiling within you. By the age of fourteen you are mature and you can reproduce children. From fourteen to twenty-one your sexual energy is at its highest peak, exactly between fourteen and twenty-one: that means seventeen and a half is the climax of sexual energy.
But this society has lived with such repressive and unnatural, unscientific ideas that these are the years when you are told to be celibate. And these are the years when you could have lived sex, and celibacy would have come by itself by the time you are forty-two.
Between twenty-one and twenty-eight, sex is very normal, very natural. From twenty-eight to thirty-five, sex starts declining. From thirty-five to forty-two, sex reaches its ultimate decline. From forty-two to forty-nine, sex disappears. That’s why in ancient India the wise people decided that by the time one is fifty-one should start preparing for vanprasth. His face should be now towards the mountains, towards the forest – that is the meaning of vanprasth. He is still in the world, but now his whole consciousness has turned and he is getting ready to move into the deep forest to be alone. The days of meditation have come.
By the time a person is fifty his children will be nearabout twenty-five. They must be getting married, they must be getting into a profession. The father can look forward to twenty-five years more…these are the twenty-five years, from fifty to seventy-five, that he can watch – he can live in the world yet not be of the world. He can watch his children slowly taking over. And after seventy-five all his interest in the world will have disappeared; then meditation will be his only interest.
But this is just a formal categorization. It depends on you and your intensity of living. You can be beyond sex by the time you are thirty-five. You can be beyond sex without much difficulty when you are forty-two. But it is unfortunate that people die still as foolish as young people.
Psychologists have come to the conclusion that most people die with the idea of sex…that is their last idea. They may be repeating the name of God, but inside they are thinking, If only it was possible one time more…! They have not lived their life wholeheartedly. That’s why something that should have ended at forty-two has continued up to eighty, up to ninety.
Live your first interest and be finished with it. But be finished with it by living it, joyously! There is nothing wrong, there is no sin. Then meditation will become absolutely simple and easy, because your mind will not be burdened with sexual infatuation and desires. That is your only bondage. All other bondages are secondary, all other bondages are branches of your sexuality.
For what do you want money? For what do you want power? Have you watched that all other interests are centered on sex? A man without money will not be able to get the most beautiful woman; a man without power will not be able to get the most beautiful woman. All your so-called desires are centered on a single fact, a single interest, and that is sex. Just live it, and live it joyously without any fear of hell or heaven. There is no hell, no heaven.
Once you are out of sex, once it has disappeared like smoke disappearing into the sky and you cannot see it, then meditation is so easy. You don’t have to make any effort, you have just to sit silently with your eyes closed, relaxed, and you will find meditation is there.
Sex and meditation…? You will not be able to live sex fully, and that will go on lingering with you. And you will not be able to meditate because sex will continuously interfere.
You know the stories of the old seers, that even at their height, in their old age, after a long, long preparation of austerities, fasting, chanting, studying holy scriptures – doing everything – when they come to the point of realization, the stories say that suddenly apsaras from heaven…Apsaras are nothing but heavenly prostitutes, specially provided for the saints. They are sent down to disturb these poor fellows’ meditation.
This is strange, why should anybody be bothered about these poor fellows who have been torturing themselves in every possible way – starving, fighting with their body, repressing their sex? There is nobody who is sending these apsaras, and these apsaras are nowhere. It is just their own repressed sexuality that starts coming up in fantasies, in hallucinations.
And it is so simple…if you want to experiment with what hallucination is, just go to a mountain cave alone, fast three weeks, and don’t meet anyone. By the end of the second week you will start talking to yourself – and not only will you talk, you will answer also! By the third week you will start seeing people…if you are a man you will see women; if you are a woman you will see men. By the fourth week you will not be able to make a distinction at all whether the woman that you see sitting in front of you in the cave is real or an hallucination…!
Just four weeks’ experiment and you will know how apsaras have come. They will come to you too; they have not stopped the process of coming. But it is simply the hallucination of your repressed desire, so deeply repressed that it takes revenge – with a vengeance.
My suggestion to you is, first sex, because it is more basic to your body, to your life; it is the foundation of life. Meditation is the highest peak, but sex is the roots. First think of the roots.
Meditation is the flowers. They come at the very end, at the very top of the tree; they will come. But don’t try both together, otherwise you will remain wishy-washy, always halfhearted…meditating and thinking about sex, making love and thinking about Gautam Buddha! This will simply drive you crazy.
And you are asking, “I want to be your favorite disciple.”
I feel scared! Please just remain a disciple! I don’t have any favorite disciples, because to have favorite disciples means people who will betray you, people who will become Judases, people who will assassinate you. People who are first trying to be favorite disciples soon would like you to move over, give place to them; now they want to be masters. I don’t want any favorite disciples. This is simple politics. Just keep to the space where you are. I am feeling perfectly at ease; when you come too close…I am allergic!
And you are saying, “What to do? Which is the worst question to ask you?” You cannot ask it. What worse question can you ask? You have asked it. But I can answer you, as bad as you like! Just I am looking for a worse…! So just be patient! It is really the worst, so just be quiet.

An English lady was on holiday in the wild west. One day she decided to visit an Indian reservation and became interested in the number of feathers in the men’s headdresses. So she asked one brave, and he replied, “Me only have one feather because me only have one squaw.”
Thinking this was a joke, she asked another brave. “Me only have four feathers because me only have four squaws,” he replied.
Somewhat perturbed, the English lady decided to ask the chief, who had a magnificent headdress full of feathers. “Me Chief,” he replied, “so me fuck them all! Big, small, short, tall…me fuck them all!”
The lady was horrified. “You ought to be hung!” she cried.
“You damned right,” said the Chief, “me hung like a buffalo!”
The English lady cried, “You don’t have to be so hostile!”
“Hoss-style, dog-style, any style…me fuck them all!”
With tears in her eyes, the lady cried, “Oh, dear….”
“No deer,” said the Chief, “Deer run too fast and asshole too high!”

============================================================

Osho,
I need my guitar to play my music.
I hear your blessed music, but I don't see your guitar.
Osho, what is your instrument?
And a few sutras for me too.
Milarepa, neither the music is mine nor the guitar. The music belongs to existence, and the guitar belongs to you. You are the guitar, and this whole vast universe is the music.
I am at the most just a passage for the music to reach to the guitar. That’s why you don’t see my guitar – because you don’t see yourself. Who are you? On whom am I playing my music? You hear my words and you also hear my silences, and naturally you feel a certain music surrounding me. That music is your response, your love, your trust.
In a way I am not here. It has been a long time since I left this small house for the eternity. It is the compassion of eternity that this small house still goes on continuing to function. It is also your love, your prayers, your gratitude that helps my body-mind system to function. I don’t have any desire to be fulfilled. All is fulfilled – and when all is fulfilled a music arises. I don’t have any ambition.
Just the other day Hasya was telling me about one beautiful man who is being followed by many people. Lovingly he is called Dada. Bhadra’s husband is his follower, and he stays at Bhadra’s house. He told Bhadra, “I agree with Osho on every point except one – that is, he wants to save the world. I have been around the world,” he said, “and I am fed up, and I don’t see any hope for the world.”
He is going to come to Pune. I told Hasya to meet him and tell him one thing, “You must have had a desire to save the world and you are feeling frustrated.”
I don’t have to save anybody. The world is perfectly saved – this moment at least. Why not enjoy this moment?
I love talking to my people without any purpose. It is just my joy seeing your faces, seeing your intrinsic capacities. Who cares about the world? – if it dies next moment, we will still be playing guitars, singing, dancing, celebrating a last farewell to the world.
Who has given the idea to this man Dada that I am a savior? It is enough to save yourself. I am not a savior and I am not at all interested what happens to the world ultimately. I enjoy the idea, the dream that some miracle will happen and this world will be saved, but it is not my goal; I am not an optimist. Only optimists turn into pessimists. Dada must have been thinking himself to be a savior, and seeing the whole world he is feeling frustrated. I have never felt frustrated by anything, because I have never expected in the very beginning. If you don’t expect you avoid frustration.
I am a man of total acceptance.
If this world exists, good; if it does not exist, better. But why should I be puzzled about it? It is my joy, and this joy is not the kind which makes people serious.
I have looked into Dada’s books before; his famous book is Beyond the Mind. Strange that a man who knows beyond mind should be frustrated…. Who can be frustrated? No-mind has never been heard to be frustrated. And he thinks he has given up the idea, and this is his disagreement with me. He has given up the idea; I never had the idea. And whatever he is saying is just a repetition of J. Krishnamurti.
J. Krishnamurti has left many orphans in the world, illegitimate children, because he never accepted them as his disciples. But deep down they enjoyed the idea that without being a disciple they are gathering so much wisdom. Soon all of them have become masters. I have come across many masters who have never been disciples. It is simply ego.
With J. Krishnamurti’s idea that “nobody is my disciple,” you feel relaxed: this is great you don’t have to love this man, you don’t know the beauties of grace that exist between the master and the disciple. You enjoy only one thing: the ego that you are nobody’s disciple. And then these who are nobody’s disciples start collecting disciples – and of all that they are saying, not a single thing is original; it is all borrowed.
I have told Hasya and Kaveesha that when Dada comes here, “Encounter him and put him right. He is misguiding many people.”
I am a man who lives moment to moment, and I want those who love me to learn the art of living moment to moment. What happens tomorrow we will see tomorrow. At least one thing is certain: whatever happens, our blissfulness, our ecstasy, our dance, our song will continue – if not on this planet, then on another planet.
There are millions of solar systems, and each solar system has hundreds of planets, each planet has many moons. Our earth is very poor, with just one moon. Our sun is mediocre; it is six thousand times bigger than the earth, but compared to other suns, which are millions of times bigger than this sun, it stands nowhere in the queue.
What is the problem? We have not asked this planet to be born; it was existence’s decision to be here. Why should one worry if existence wants us to take our song and our music and our consciousness to another planet? We will be there…one thing is certain: this commune is going to exist. The whole existence is there….
Ronald Reagan cannot manage to destroy the universe. This poor earth will be destroyed…that too is possible if existence deep down wills to destroy it. Or perhaps the earth itself has become old, tired, fed up with all kinds of nonsense that man has been doing, and it wants to go into eternal sleep. It is a living being.
But these are not our problems. Our only problem is how to be in this moment, so totally, so intensely that we don’t need another moment. This will be enough to give us fulfillment, contentment, ecstasy, which I don’t think this man Dada has ever glimpsed.
Pessimists cannot get it; optimists only hope for it. We are realists, existentialists: we have it right now.
It is not a question of getting fed up, it is not a question of hoping for the future. We take the present moment and squeeze the whole juice of it – that’s our religion. Wherever we will be, one thing is certain: we will recognize each other just by the style of squeezing the juice from the present moment.
Faces may be different, planets may be different, that does not mean anything. We have a key to recognize our people: in their eyes, in their faces, they are always existential.
Milarepa, you are my instrument. Your guitar is my guitar. Your fingers playing on the instruments are my fingers. Can’t you allow that?

Ramakrishna was dying. He had a cancer of the throat; he could not eat, could not drink. His disciples continuously were harassing him saying “Why don’t you close your eyes and tell the mother goddess?” – he was the priest of a temple of mother goddess Kali – “Just saying, ‘Remove this cancer’ will be enough.”
Ramakrishna said, “Don’t be angry with me. I have tried it, but the moment I close my eyes and I see the mother goddess, I forget about the cancer.”
All the disciples gathered with Ramakrishna’s wife, Sharda, and told her, “Now only you can help.”
Sharda went to Ramakrishna and said, “This time you are not going to forget the cancer. Why are you making so many people miserable?”
And Ramakrishna respected his wife so much; she was almost a mother to him rather than a wife. He touched her feet the very moment he had been shown her as a candidate for marriage. Everybody thought, “This boy is mad. Who touches the feet of the wife? – and she is not your wife yet.”
And the first thing he called to her was, “Mother, don’t forget me; I had chosen you.”
Everybody in the village tortured him, “You idiot, the wife is not called mother. And touching her feet…” He had three rupees. He offered those three rupees to the feet of Sharda. The family of Sharda also became puzzled: “The man seems to be crazy.”
But Sharda insisted that if she will marry anyone, that is the man: “The innocence, the purity…he is no ordinary human being. He has something of the beyond already” – and he was only thirteen years old.
Since Sharda married Ramakrishna he always called her mother. It doesn’t look good not to follow the advice of the mother. He said, “I will try one time more, and because you are telling me, I will put my whole energy to remember what I have to say to the mother goddess.”
He closed his eyes…and then opened them laughing. He said, “Sharda, call all the disciples in who have made you their mouthpiece, because I remembered and I told her. And she said, ‘Ramakrishna, you have been using this throat for so many years. Now you have so many throats, your disciples, your lovers – why can’t you eat through their throats, why can’t you drink through their throats? Why cling to this body? Why not spread into everybody’s body who loves you, who will welcome you in the silences of his heart?’”

There was great silence, there was nothing to say.
Milarepa, you hear my music; that music comes from the beyond. I cannot claim any monopoly, any copyright on it. And you want to see my guitar – just look at your guitar, just look at your hands. In deep love a synchronicity happens. You start doing things which my deepest being wanted to do, but I don’t know music; I cannot even recognize which is a guitar and which is a harmonium and which is a saxophone.
I have never been a singer, not even a bathroom singer. I have lived in many houses in this country with many friends, and many times people have asked, “At least we were thinking you will be singing in the bathroom, but you don’t sing?”
I don’t know singing…I am a song. I don’t know singing – you will have to sing in me. You will have to allow yourself to be totally available to me.
You can dance and it will be my dance.
You can sing and it will be my song.
You can play on instruments, but your fingers will be in synchronicity with me, and I am in synchronicity with the whole. So it is just formal to say that you are my songs, that you are my music. I am just a small passage; the beyond comes through me to your eyes. And because it is of the beyond it has a tremendous capacity to transform you.
I have not said a single word to you on my own; hence I can claim originality in the literal sense of the word. Ordinarily originality means nobody else has said it, only I am saying it; that is using the word wrongly. Originality should mean it is coming from the origins…origins of life, origins of love, origins of existence.
And you are asking, “And a few sutras for me too.”
Milarepa, that is not your business. Devageet has gone mad contemplating on transdental medication. You are already crazy, you can go far – Devageet you can leave far behind – so I am a little worried about you. But whatever has to be, has to be. These are a few sutras for you:

…If your neighbor does you harm, just buy each of his children a drum.
…All you need in this life is ignorance and confidence, and the success is sure.
…Sex is what happens between a man and a woman before they get to know each other.
…Reality is what your mother thinks you ought to live in.
…You know you are getting old when the girls at the office start confiding in you.
…A woman can keep one secret – the secret of her age.
…Except for that, she cannot keep any secret!
…God invented man because he was disappointed in the monkey.
…A man never knows what a fool he is until he hears himself imitated by one.
…It is natural. How can you see your face without a mirror?…
…Be nice to people on your way up because you will meet them on your way down.
…A mistake is evidence that someone tried to do something.

…You can see the mistake all over the world. This is the only proof that God tried to do something. Perhaps he was the creator. Creation may not need some creator, but mistakes need someone to do them. This whole world is a mistake, and I think this is the only proof that God may have been trying to do something….

…If a person does not learn from the mistakes of others, he won’t live long enough to make all of them himself.
…The art of medicine consists of amusing the patient while nature cures the disease.
…Everyone is as God made him, and often a good deal worse.
…Gossip is what no one claims to like, but everybody enjoys.
…It is difficult to climb a ladder with your hands in your pockets, but it is possible if your hands are in someone else’s pockets…

Then you can climb any ladder. The people you see at the top, those big chunks, their hands are always in somebody else’s pocket.
So whenever you meet the so-called leaders, popes, shankaracharyas, take care about your pockets. They are not interested in you, they are interested only in your pockets….

…Familiarity breeds contempt – and children.
…The hardest task of a woman’s life is to prove to a man that his intentions are serious.
…How do you know your therapy group is right for you?
One: It is too expensive.
Two: All your friends have done it.
Three: It focuses on problems you never knew you had.

Osho,
Every time I come to you, I feel like one of those ancient warriors who came to pay his respects to the emperor. He would enter into his presence, take off his helmet and put it at the feet of the emperor.
The only difference is that I am putting my head at your feet. More so when I ask you a question, and even trembling inside, I put my head as close as possible, for you to cut it with your sword.
But every time, to my infinite surprise, you shower the nectar of your grace on my poor head, the fragrance of your compassion, and an ocean of love in which I find myself drowning deeper and deeper each time.
Osho, what has happened to your sword?
How many times will I have to provoke you to cut my head?
Sarjano, it surprises me to know that you have a head. Some idiot guy must have given you the idea.
I have not lost my sword – you have forgotten your head somewhere…maybe drowned in spaghetti!…or do you prefer pizza?
But as far as I know you don’t have any head. I have tried to cut it, but what to cut? Certainly you are brave enough to go on trying again and again and again. This does not suit the Italian; this is the American stupidity! Try again and again and again…For what? – for the sake of trying. Everybody in America is so busy trying, and nobody knows for what. Trying itself has become the goal; speed itself has become the destination.
But Italians are far more loving beings, far more centered in the heart. Perhaps that’s why you go on living without a head – the heart is enough. And no master in the whole of history has cut anybody’s heart with the sword. But I am not a reliable man, so you be alert!
A story for you…

The English pirate ship was alone on the high seas. Suddenly the lookout came running. “Captain! Captain!” he cried, “there are five Spanish galleons on the horizon!”
“Quick!” said the captain. “Bring me my red coat.”
So he did, and the captain put it on, and the pirate ship defeated the Spanish galleons.
The next day the lookout came running again. “Captain! Captain! There are ten Spanish galleons on the horizon!”
“Okay,” said the captain. “Bring me my red coat.”
He put it on and they defeated the ten galleons.
“Captain,” asked the lookout. “Would you tell me why you always ask for your red coat before we go into battle?”
“Oh, that’s because if I’m wounded, the blood will not show; then the men will not be frightened and we will fight to victory!” the captain replied.
The next day the lookout came running. “Captain! Captain!” he cried, “there are a hundred Spanish galleons on the horizon!”
At these words the captain’s face turned white, and he called to his lookout, “Quick, bring me my brown pants!”

Just be alert!
I love you, so I’m going to kill you – that’s certain. Love is a sure killer. But I kill gradually, because in my experience if you kill suddenly, people start escaping. Gradually, they don’t know what is happening, they come to know only when they are gone.
And this place is for only those who are ready to be gone. You become your ultimate flowering only when you are not. It is a strange fundamental law of existence, and there is no way to change it.
The more you are, the less you are.
The less you are, the more you are.
If you are all, then you don’t exist. If you are a nothingness, you have tasted existence for the first time.
So, Sarjano, while I go on taking small pieces from your ego, from your so-called personality, you keep yourself engaged in spaghetti and pizza. It is a perfect art!
The authentic master kills the disciple, so that he also can become a pure nothingness, and can become one with the universe. The ancient sages of this country have said that the master is a death. Unless you find a master who can be a death to you, don’t waste time. Go on searching, somewhere you will find a master who is going to erase you completely. He will give you your real and authentic being.
Your question is right: I have not lost my sword. It is just because you don’t have your head, so you can’t see it. But you can feel, and that is far better – to function through the heart.

Osho,
Kahlil Gibran has said, “I will tell you a thing you may not know: the most highly sexed beings upon the planet are the creators, the poets, sculptors, painters, musicians – and so it has been from the beginning. And amongst them, sex is a beautiful and exalted gift.”
Please talk on sex as part of the creative life of the artist.
Kahlil Gibran is a man of tremendous insight. What he says is always significant and worth contemplating over. He has forgotten just one thing, which is natural, because he had no experience of that faraway horizon. He talks about the creators – the poets, the sculptors, the painters, the musicians – but he forgets completely about the awakened ones. It is not right to forget; in fact he had no idea – and they are the highest creators. Poets and sculptors and musicians and dancers are very low categories in comparison to a Gautam Buddha, Bodhidharma, Lao Tzu, Chuang Tzu.
What he is saying is absolutely right: sex is the only energy you have. But you can use it in a destructive way – and that too he has forgotten. An Adolf Hitler or a Joseph Stalin or a Benito Mussolini or Ronald Reagan, these people are all abnormally highly sexual. In a few people the sex energy is so much that they cannot be satisfied by only creating children.
This is simply a known fact, that children are created through sex. So sex is certainly a creative force, which can even create life. But there are highly sexed people, and just to produce children is not enough to exhaust their sexuality. They create music; music becomes their outlet. They create art, they create paintings, poetries…and they are thought of always by the society as outsiders, they are not accepted as normal human beings. Something is crazy about them; they are eccentric.
So he has forgotten two things. One is that the destructive people are also highly sexed people, but they use their energy in destruction. It is not automatically decisive that a highly sexed person will be always a creator; most probably he will be a destroyer.
But he is right that sex creates children, creates painting, creates music, creates sculpture. The world is divided into three kinds of people: the normal sexual people who only create children, the abnormally sexual people who either become destructive, create wars, destroy as much as they can – and the third category, the creators.
Kahlil Gibran’s insight is right, but incomplete. He himself is a poet and a painter, but he knows nothing about awakened consciousness. That is the highest point of creation: creating yourself as an immortal. Because it is an inner creation, people don’t count Gautam Buddha as a creator, or Mahavira or Naropa or Tilopa; they don’t consider these people as creators, because they can’t see what they have created. They have created themselves, and that is the greatest creation in the world. Just look at Gautam Buddha, his silence, his peace, his understanding, his clarity, his blissfulness, his ecstasy…unwavering.
No enlightened person has ever committed suicide, but the great creators Kahlil Gibran is talking about are well known for two things: either they go mad or they commit suicide. They go mad when their energy cannot find an outlet. They are mad in their paintings, in their poetry – but nothing satisfies, everything falls below their standard. That drives them mad. Almost every great artist in the West has at least once visited the madhouse for a few years. Or when they feel they are exhausted and now there is no more energy left to create, their whole meaning of life disappears. Creation was their meaning. In creating things they had become small gods, and now they are nobody, exhausted, used cartridges. These are the people who commit suicide.
Van Gogh I can give you as an example – one of the greatest painters the world has ever known passed through all the stages, so he is a perfect example. He was so mad in creating. He was a poor coal miner’s son, uneducated, but from the very beginning he started painting laborers, old people, children. And whoever looked at them was amazed: his painting was almost photographic.
His parents wanted him to be a priest. Fortunately, he did not listen to them. He went to the school to become a priest, but all that he did there was drawings of the professors, the missionaries. He never learned anything else. Finally, he was brought back home. The parents were tired; they told him, “Now you are free. Whatever you want to do…but we are not going to take any financial responsibility.” He was even happy in this situation. He left for Paris.
He was Dutch. His younger brother was employed, and out of compassion every week he used to send him the exact money so that he could purchase bread and butter for seven days. He was afraid to send him enough for the whole month, because that would go into purchasing paints and canvases. But he was not aware what he had done to his brother. Out of seven days he used to eat three days – one day here, one day there – and four days he saved money to purchase canvases, colors, brushes, whatever is needed for painting.
No man has been so mad that he was dying of hunger and starvation, but that was the only way to paint. And the great difficulty was – otherwise things would have been easier and more comfortable – he did not manage to sell a single painting, because his paintings were the paintings of a genius, and a genius always comes before his time. This existence has strange laws.
Now his paintings…only two hundred have been saved. He used to give paintings to his friends just for a cup of tea, just for a packet of cigarettes.
Now his paintings are the costliest paintings in the world. The last painting was sold for thirty-five million dollars – that is the record. Never before was any painting sold at thirty million dollars; the last record was only nine million dollars. I don’t think any painting is ever is going to outdo him.
Why could people not purchase his paintings? He was ready to give at any price, just the cost price. He worked for days and he was not asking even for labor. They could not understand those paintings; those paintings needed a genius to understand them. He has painted stars, not the way you see them, but as spirals. Now who is going to believe that these are stars? – everybody knows what stars are! Only just this year it has been found that stars are not the way you see them, but the way Vincent van Gogh saw them. Strange, without any scientific instruments without a big lab…tremendous clarity.
It took one hundred years for science to find out that his stars are the only right stars, and all other stars painted are just rubbish. The same has happened about his other paintings. If he could have sold his paintings, he could have made more paintings, but he became tired, starved. His only desire was to paint all the phases of the sun, from the sunrise to the sunset, a whole series of paintings.
The day that series was complete he had exhausted all his energy. He simply wrote a letter to his brother, “I am not committing suicide. I have burned myself out. But I am dying happily because what I wanted to accomplish is accomplished – I am one of the most contented men. The last painting is complete today.” And he shot himself dead. He was only thirty-three years of age.
It is true that you have no other energy than sexual energy. All creation is out of sexual energy. In other words, every creation is a by-product of your sexual energy; even if you become the richest man in the world, that is sexual energy. But Kahlil Gibran has forgotten two things: one, that sexual energy can be destructive; second, that sexual energy never brings you to self-realization, which is the ultimate creation.
It seems he was not actually aware. Although he has written books on Jesus, and he spoke in the language of tremendous beauty and poetry, he was looking at Jesus as a poet. He was not aware of Ta Hui or Bodhidharma or Gautam Buddha, and he was not aware what the problem is. In the East, no enlightened person goes mad, no enlightened person commits suicide. Going mad is the function of the mind. Committing suicide is also the function of the mind.
And because the enlightened person is beyond mind, there is no question of madness, and there is no question of suicide. He lives, and he lives totally. He lives, and he lives at the very peak of intelligence and understanding and awareness.
But I want to add this much to Kahlil Gibran’s statement: that these people are also immensely sexual, perhaps more sexual than the poets, than the singers, than the musicians. They have so much energy that they are capable of self-realization, that they are capable of giving a rebirth to themselves.
But basically I agree with the incomplete statement of Kahlil Gibran. I would have loved it if he had made it complete, but he himself was not complete. It is a great exercise of understanding if you look at Kahlil Gibran’s statements, and then you look at Kahlil Gibran’s life. You will be amazed; his life was very ordinary, perhaps below ordinary, and the poetry is reaching to the stars.
Because they are not artists of life – they are artists creating objects who have forgotten themselves – their situation is exactly like the scientist’s. A man like Albert Einstein has immense energy, and that energy is sexual, because there is no other energy. The word sex has become so condemned that it is better to say it is life energy, just to protect the energy from the centuries of condemnation.
Albert Einstein worked on objects, faraway stars, the speed of light…and he managed to figure it all out. But he never bothered about his own life; he remained focused on the outside.
If a poet turns inwards he becomes a mystic.
If a scientist turns inwards he becomes a mystic.
The energy is the same, but the direction changes.
Kahlil Gibran lived a very miserable life, sometimes ugly. He was a man of great anger, quarrelsome, but he has created great poetry. If you just look at his words, they are pure twenty-four-carat gold. But avoid the man, don’t look at him; otherwise your respect for his words will be lost.
The poets, the scientists, the musicians and other creators have a double personality, a split personality, some kind of schizophrenia. One part of them goes on creating, and one part lags far behind.
The mystic is the only person in existence who is not schizophrenic, who is unique and one, organically one, undivided. His life and his words have the same flavor. But I think Kahlil Gibran in the first place was not capable of knowing the interiority of a mystic; and in the second place, perhaps he was afraid to say that a buddha is created by great abundance of sexual energy. Nobody bothered him, nobody condemned him when he called poets and sculptors and musicians and other creators oversexed. But if he had called Jesus, Gautam Buddha, Mohammed, Moses oversexed, he would have been condemned all over the world.
But I want to say that all great people in the world, destructive or creative, are people of so much energy, life energy, life force, that they cannot contain it within themselves; they have to do something. I would like that they all turn inwards, so their life is not a split and an agony, and so it becomes an ecstasy.

Joe was sitting at the bar, slowly sipping his drink, when his friend, Mickey, came running in.
“Joe,” he shouted, “get over to your house real quick. I just stopped off to see you and I heard a man’s voice in your bedroom. So I looked through your window and I saw your wife in bed with another man.”
“Is that so?” said Joe, matter-of-factly. “What does this guy looks like?”
“Oh, he’s tall and completely bald,” said Mickey.
“And did he have a thick red mustache?” asked Joe.
“Right, right!” yelled Mickey.
“Did he have a front gold tooth?” asked Joe.
“Damn it, you are right!” replied Mickey.
“Must be that idiot Dick Roberts,” said Joe. “He will screw anything.”

There are people of that category also – no life energy, at the most lukewarm. They never create anything. Even to create children is such a task.
And by the way, I should also mention to you – to make Kahlil Gibran’s insight more clear – that no impotent man has been a poet or a sculptor or a scientist; the question of being a mystic does not arise. Perhaps impotency is the worst situation a man can find himself in. But strangely enough all the religions are teaching people to be impotent; they call it celibacy.
Because of this idea of celibacy, religions have been absolutely uncreative. The energy was there in people…they could not create, because to create you need an esthetic sense, you need a loving heart, a feeling individuality. To become celibate they have destroyed all these qualities. So the only possibility for their expression of sexual energy is either perverted sex, homosexuality, lesbianism, or destruction in the name of God, in the name of truth, in the name of Christianity, in the name of Islam…. They have been continuously destroying each other.
Perhaps nobody has looked at the psychology of why it happens. It has nothing to do with their metaphysics; it has something to do with their inner life force. They cannot contain it…then a crusade, jihad, a religious war – Jews fighting with Mohammedans, Mohammedans killing Jews, Christians killing Mohammedans, Christians killing Jews.
Hindus have completely destroyed Buddhism in India. Buddha was the greatest man on the earth in the past history…and he has left such a great impact on every intelligent being in this country. But when he died, within five hundred years the old priesthood of the Hindus, the brahmins destroyed everything that they could.
You will not believe that Mohammedans not only killed human beings, they also destroyed great pieces of art, because they were worshipped as religious – beautiful statues of Buddha, great temples.
In every ancient well in India there are beautiful statues, because out of fear that their statues would be destroyed, people have thrown them into the wells. So whenever an ancient well is cleaned or looked into, they are surprised…”What is the matter?” In every well are beautiful statues of Mahavira, of Bahubali, of Gautam Buddha.
There was no need to destroy the whole statue because a superstition exists all over India that if a statue is a little bit damaged – one ear is missing – it is no more worshipable; it has to be removed. There are millions of statues so beautiful…somebody’s ear is missing, somebody’s nose is missing, somebody’s hand has been cut – that was enough, and they have been thrown out.
I happened to be in a city near Katni in a small place in Madhya Pradesh. There are thousands of statues – the village consists only of statues, so beautiful that thousands of people must have worked for thousands of years – but nobody lives there. I inquired, tried to find out in old gazettes of the government, and I found only one reference in an old scripture. That village was the village of sculptors. Being afraid that their statues will be destroyed, they covered their statues with mud and escaped, burned their houses so nobody will think that there is a village.
Now it has become a thick forest, wild trees have grown, but it must have been a very great place when it was alive. Those statues show that the village must have contained thousands and thousands of great artists. Now it is a ghost village. Only statues…they have been discovered during the British regime; their mud has been taken away. It was one of the great discoveries.
In Khajuraho, one of the most famous cities of temples, there were one hundred temples. It is simply mind-boggling to see a single temple; it takes almost one day, there are so many statues. You cannot find a single inch which is not carved…and huge temples. They were also buried under mud, small mud hills. Only thirty could be saved; the Mohammedans destroyed seventy.
They have been discovered again, and there is no sculpture anywhere in the world – I have looked into all kinds of sculpture that existed and exists in the world, but the beauty that Khajuraho sculpture has is just superhuman – so perfect that one cannot believe things can be made so perfect, so beautiful.
Religions have only destroyed, because they prevented the creative dimension. In the name of celibacy only two things have happened: destruction and AIDS. These are the two great contributions of all your religions. And if man is intelligent enough, there is no need to say that these religions should disappear. They have done enough harm. We don’t need them at all; we can be religious without religions.
I have made you serious again! Once in a while I forget. So for no reason at all, just for a good laugh, because I hate to leave Buddha Hall unless I see you all are rejoicing and laughing…

A Polish worker went to a local bank to deposit his wages of one week. Worried about the dire conditions of the Polish economy, he inquired what would happen if the bank collapsed.
“All our deposits are guaranteed by the ministry of finance,” the teller replied.
“But what if the ministry of finance could not honor the guarantee?” the worker persisted.
“In that case the Polish government itself would intercede,” the teller said with growing irritation.
“But what if the government would go bankrupt?” the worker asked with undiminished concern.
“In that case our socialist comrades in the Soviet Union would naturally come to our assistance,” the teller retorted.
“But what if the Soviet Union collapsed?” the Polish worker persisted.
“Idiot,” snapped the teller, “is not that worth losing one week’s wages?”

============================================================

Osho,
Last night as you were giving sutras for Devageet to contemplate, you went directly from the third to the fifth, without speaking about the fourth. Is there some significance in this?
I don’t know much arithmetic…that’s why I continuously go on counting on my fingers! But that is the original way. That’s why there are ten digits in every language – man started to count on his fingers. Because there are ten fingers, that’s why ten is the basic number in all languages.
I am an original man.
But aside from that, there was really something significant. The fourth I have saved for you. So now I will have to begin from the fourth.
The fourth is:
…There are four stages of getting old.
First, when you forget names.
Second, when you forget places.
Third, when you forget to zip up.
And fourth, when you forget to zip down.
The fifth sutra for you:
…A ninety-three-year-old man married a ninety-one-year-old lady and they spent the first three days of their honeymoon just trying to get out of the car.
…Sixth: Middle age is when you have stopped growing at both ends – and have begun to grow in the middle.
…Seventh: An optimist is a man who goes to the window every morning and says, “Good morning, God!”
The pessimist goes to the window every morning and says, “Good god – morning!”
…Eighth: There are two ways to be rich. One is to have all you want, the other is to be satisfied with all you have.
Now I have forgotten the number…I assume it is ninth:
…Freedom is a great thing. It means a man is free to do just what his wife pleases.
…Tenth: A man does not stop playing because he grows old, he grows old because he stops playing.
…Eleventh: Tolerance is sometimes the uncomfortable feeling that the other person may be right after all.
…Twelfth: To have average intelligence is to be less stupid than half of the people and more stupid than the other half.
…My god, I have forgotten the number! I hope it is thirteenth:
…If all else fails, give up.
…Fourteenth: It is always best not to tell people your troubles. Half of them are not interested, and the other half are glad you are getting what is coming to you.
…Fifteenth: When Henry Ford was asked for the recipe for a long and happy marriage, he replied: “Always stick to the same model.”
Sixteenth: A man who can smile when things go wrong has probably just thought of someone to blame it on.
…Seventeenth: Inscription on the tombstone of a notorious hypochondriac: “See!”
…Eighteenth: A pessimist is a man who thinks all women are bad. An optimist is one who hopes they are.
…Nineteenth: The definition of alimony: “The screwing you get for the screwing you got.”
…Twentieth: The ten best years of a woman’s life are between thirty-five and thirty-six.

Osho,
What is this generation gap? I hear so much about it these days.
Two old men of eighty were sitting in their club when one said, “Do you think there is as much love, as much fun going on as there used to be?”
“Yes, certainly,” said the other, “but there is a whole new bunch doing it.”

That’s what the generation gap is.

A large crowd had been waiting quietly at the foot of a mountain. Moses had been gone for hours. Suddenly his white robe was seen fluttering in the breeze, and now the lawgiver stood before his flock: “People of Israel! I have been with the Lord for seven hours and I now have some good news, and some bad news….”
“Speak, O Moses!” shouted the crowd.
“The good news,” says Moses, “is that I have managed to bring the number of commandments down to ten!”
The people cheered. Then they cried, “Moses, what is the bad news?”
Moses sadly replied, “Adultery is still in.”

For the new generation it is no longer in. That’s the generation gap. Now the whole meaning of adultery has changed: it simply means to be adult.
There has never been any generation gap in the past. Hence, one has to look deeply into it because this is the first time in the whole history of man that even the expression “generation gap” has been used. And the gap is growing bigger and bigger every day. Things seem to be unbridgeable.
There is certainly a great psychology behind it. In the past there used to be no young age. You will be surprised to know about it: children used to become adult without being young. A six-year-old, seven-year-old child would start working with his father; if the father was a carpenter he would learn carpentry, or at least help his father. If the father was a farmer he would go to the farm with the father, would help him with the animals, cows, horses. By the age of six or seven he had already entered into life. By the age of twenty he would be married and have a few children.
In the past there was no “younger generation” hence there was no gap. One generation followed another generation in a continuity, with no gap between them. By the time the father died his son would have already replaced him in every field of his life. There was no time to play and there was no time to get educated; there were no schools, no colleges, no universities.
The new generation is a by-product of many things. In the past the only way of learning was to participate with the older generation, work with them – that was the only way to learn. And of course the older generation was always respected, because they were the teachers. They knew, and you were ignorant; the ignorant necessarily respected the knowledgeable. Hence in the past it was almost inconceivable that the younger people would disrespect the old people, or could even think in their dreams that they knew more than the older people. Knowledge was very decisive.
The people who knew had the power, and the people who did not, had no power. It was in those old days that the proverb must have been coined: “knowledge is power.” That was the only criterion in life, so you never heard of any revolt of the young against the old.
This generation has come to a new, totally new stage. The child never goes following in his father’s footsteps. He goes to the school; his father goes to his shop or to the office or to the farm. By the time he comes back from his university he is twenty-five years old. For these twenty-five years he has no connection with the older generation. His only connection is financial; they help him financially. In these twenty-five years many things happen: one, he knows more than his parents because his parents had been to school at least twenty, twenty-five years before. In these twenty-five years, knowledge has taken such quantum leaps – it has grown so much….
I was very much puzzled when I was in the university: my professor of psychology was quoting names and books which had been out of date for almost three decades. And because I was so interested to know everything – before I entered into myself, I had to know everything that was happening around – I was continuously in the library.
And it is impossible to respect a professor who knows less than you know, who is outmoded. He should be ashamed to remain in the seat of the professor. That’s what I told my professor of psychology: “It is simply undignified for you to remain in that seat, because you don’t know what is happening in the field of psychology today. You know what was happening thirty years before. Since the day you left your university you have not touched a single book.”
He was very angry. He said, “Who says that?”
I said, “Come with me, I have checked in the university register.” For twenty years he had been a professor in that university and he had not taken a single book from the library. I had looked into twenty years’ registers, just to check whether this man had ever had issued in his name even a single book.
He could not believe…when I took him to the library he said, “Where are you taking me?”
I said, “This is the library.”
He said, “But what is the point of it? What are we going to do in the library? How are you going to prove that I have not been reading?”
I said, “You just come in.” And I had those twenty years’ registers there, and I told him, “These are the registers for all twenty years and your name is not mentioned even a single time. And now I am coming with you to your home.”
He said, “For what?”
I said, “Just to see what you go on doing, how many books on modern psychology are in your home. I am giving you a chance: perhaps you have your own collection and you don’t come to the library.”
He said, “No, there is no need!”
I said, “You don’t be worried. I have been there this morning already – I don’t take chances. I asked your wife and she said, ‘That idiot, all he reads is the newspaper.’”
Education has created one of the most important elements of the generation gap. Teachers complain that students don’t respect them – why should they?
When addressing a meeting of professors, I said to them, “Every professor is complaining about only one thing: ‘Something has to be done; students don’t pay respect to us.’ And I am here to say something exactly the opposite: Something certainly has to be done, because no professor seems to be respectable. It is not a question of students not paying respect to you; it is a question of your own. You are no longer respectable. Why were you respectable in the past? – do you understand? You knew more. Today, students know more than you. Unless you remain ahead of your students you cannot be respected.”
Respect needs some rationale. Parents are continually complaining that their children don’t respect them, because children are no longer the old kind of children who were following in their footsteps. A new dimension of education has opened in this century which is not in the direction of the old. The old direction was simple: follow the elders, because they know and you don’t know. There was only one way of knowing and that was by experience. Naturally, the older person had more experience.
Now, through education, experience is not at all a necessity. By learning, studying, you can know as much as you want. Just sitting in the library you can know the whole world in all its dimensions, whatsoever is happening. You need not even move out of the library.
It reminds me of Karl Marx – the founder of communism, the last religion in the world. He spent his whole life, without a single holiday, in the British Museum, just reading and reading and reading. He used to reach the British Museum before it opened; he would be waiting on the steps. And there were many occasions when he was pushed out forcibly because the museum had to be closed. There were a few occasions when he was taken away in an ambulance…because he had been reading all day since the morning – without eating, without drinking, and he had fainted on the table.
Now if this man knew more than anybody else of his generation, however old he was…he could not respect old age. Old age has lost respect because a new territory, a new space of learning and knowledge has opened up.
You are going to see a still bigger gap – one of which humanity is still not aware – and I am talking about it for the first time. One gap has been created by education. If meditation becomes a worldwide movement, another gap will be created which will be immense. Then the old man and the young man will be as far apart as the two poles of the earth. Even communication between them has already become difficult; it will become impossible.
The people who are here with me can understand what I am saying. If you start moving into the world of no-mind, then the people who are old, who have gathered much knowledge in the mind, will look to you retarded, undeveloped, very ordinary. There is no reason why you should respect them; they have to respect you – you have transcended mind.
And the world is becoming more and more interested in meditation. It will not be long before the day when meditation will become your education for the ultimate. Your ordinary education is about the outside. Meditation will be the education about your interiority, about your inner being.
Of course it will take a little time, because there will be many frauds; there will be many pretenders, false prophets, technicians. You have to understand the difference between a meditator and a man who knows the technique of meditation; he is not himself a meditator – he is a technician.
For example, I have not seen Dulari here; she is one of my old fellow-travelers. So I inquired today what has happened to Dulari, and I have heard that she has been in one man’s meditation camp. That man is utterly, utterly stupid. But he knows the technique, about that there is no doubt. He has been in Burma…and in Burma…he was only a businessman, but he learned the Burmese technique of Vipassana.
Vipassana has many forms: the Burmese, the Ceylonese, the Tibetan, the Chinese, the Korean, the Japanese. The Japanese is the best. But all those techniques have come from Gautam Buddha; perhaps he never thought that it would be possible to learn the technique and not to do the meditation. The technique is simply how to do it.
This man, Goenka…I have never thought it worthwhile to say anything about him. Many of you must have been in his Vipassana camps…. Just a few days before I left America I received a newsletter in which he had made a statement about me. That amazed me – that was the beginning. I started looking into this man’s capacity, potentiality, realization. He made a statement that he had seen me and talked with me for hours in Madras. Now, I have been to Madras in India only once. That was twenty-five years ago, and I am absolutely certain that I have met nobody and talked with nobody for hours about Vipassana. Even the word Vipassana was not mentioned while I was in Madras for three days.
Seeing this statement gave me the idea that this man cannot be a meditator. If he can lie so easily…. Now Dulari has been in his camp, and after the camp she has been meditating, using the technique given by him, for ten hours a day.
I want Dulari to be alert. And particularly her husband should report to the police, because meditation – particularly Vipassana meditation – should not be done more than two hours. And those two hours have to be early in the morning; the best time is before sunrise. If somebody goes on meditating for ten hours, the ultimate consequence is going to be insanity. And there will be by-products also; for example, a man meditating for ten hours will lose his sleep completely.
I had a case sent to me from Ceylon, which is a Buddhist country, with so many Buddhist priests preaching Vipassana meditation…. The technique is so simple, but they have never done it themselves. To teach anything to anybody which you have not done – and experienced all its possibilities, consequences, difficulties, problems that it can lead you into – then you are a criminal.
This man who was sent to me was a Buddhist monk. He had lost his sleep for three years, and every treatment was done but no treatment was successful; no medicine would work. He had been told by his teacher – I cannot call him a master – to do Vipassana in the night. Even if you do Vipassana in the day, its effects will carry into the night; that’s why I am suggesting the most distant point, before sunrise. Just two hours are enough; more than that…even nectar can become poison in a certain quantity.
Vipassana for ten hours a day can drive anybody mad. That’s why I want to make it clear, because if Dulari goes mad I will be condemned because she has been associated with me for twenty years. She should stop doing that technique. At the most, for two hours before sunrise she can do it; that will be healthy and that will bring her deep insight and understanding. But ten hours is too much. Her consciousness will not be able to contain that much. Instead of having a breakthrough, the greater possibility is of having a breakdown. It can become a strain – it will become a strain.
That’s why I am saying, if she continues then her husband should inform the police. And if she goes mad then he should sue this utterly, utterly stupid Goenka for driving his wife mad.
There are many idiots all around. And because humanity has come to a crisis point where it needs a new dimension for consciousness, naturally many people will come with false ideas. Or maybe the ideas are right but the person who is bringing them is not right; then too the idea is going to harm humanity.
Meditation is not something mechanical; hence there can be no technicians of meditation. Goenka is a technician: he knows exactly what is being done in the Burmese style of Vipassana, but he is not a man of meditation – he is not a man of enlightenment.
And now he has made teaching Vipassana his profession; now it is a business. He is still a businessman. He was a businessman in Burma; just the commodity has changed. He must have been selling something else; here he is selling the technique of Vipassana. And people are gullible. When they see that so many people are going, they start thinking perhaps they should also go.
The generation gap that education has created is nothing compared to the generation gap that meditation can create. This gap is quantitative, that gap will be qualitative. A man with meditation has no age: he is neither a child nor is he young nor is he old. He is eternity itself. How can you expect from him that he should be respectful to old idiots, donkeys and all kinds of animals all around?
But this is also a time to be very alert and very aware: don’t be too much impressed by what a person says. Look deeper into the person and his individuality. See whether he has ecstasy in his eyes, watch whether his gestures have the grace of a Gautam Buddha, look very carefully to see whether his inner being radiates light and fragrance. Is he a man of love, compassion and truth? Look at the man, not at his knowledge, because knowledge is available in the books so easily; anybody can collect it. But your being is not available in the holy scriptures.
Your being you have to find. You have to sharpen your intelligence and you have to bring the ultimate within you as a guest. And when the ultimate is a guest within you, you are a flame, you are a fire. Of course your fire does not burn anybody, but heals. Your fire is cool, not warm. Your fire is just a lotus flower.
The seeker should look at the master first – not at what he says, but what he is. Is he something transcendental? Is his life a laughter, a song, a dance, a joy, a blissfulness? Or is he just a pretender, a businessman fulfilling your expectations – of course, showing humbleness, humility…just business tactics.
A man of real truth has no need to be humble. He is neither egoist nor humble, because those are the same things in different quantities. Only the egoist can become humble. I cannot say I am a humble man. I cannot say that I am a simple man, because simplicity is only a lesser form of complexity, and humbleness is on a lower strata, the same as ego. They are not different; the degrees are different.
I am neither humble nor egoist.
I am simply just the way I am.
These people will pretend everything. They will behave in every way that you expect them to behave. That is their whole strategy of catching people. But the intention is to exploit.
Vipassana is one of the greatest meditations, but only in the hands of a master. In the hands of a technician it is the greatest danger. Either the man can become enlightened or the man can become mad; both possibilities are there, it all depends under whose guidance it is being done.
When the Ceylonese monk was sent to me I said, “I am not a Buddhist, and you have been under the guidance of Buddhist monks. What was the need for you to come to me?”
He said, “They have all failed. They have taught me, but they cannot cure me. And I am going crazy. I cannot sleep a single wink.”
When he told me this…Buddhist monks are not supposed to laugh, but I told him a joke. For a moment he was shocked, because he had come very seriously. I told him that a man in England, no ordinary man but a very rich lord, was asking another lord – with the English attitude, mannerism: “Is it right that you slept with my wife last night?” And the other lord said, “My friend, not a wink.”
Even the Buddhist monk laughed. He said, “You are a strange person. I have come from Ceylon and you tell me a joke! And I am a religious man.”
I said, “That’s why I am telling you a religious joke. If you stay with me I will tell you irreligious jokes too.”
I said, “Your problem is not curable by any medicine. Your problem is created by your Vipassana.”
He said, “Vipassana? But Vipassana was the meditation of Gautam Buddha; through it he became enlightened.”
I said, “You are not a Gautam Buddha, and you don’t understand that Vipassana done after sunset is very dangerous. If you do Vipassana for just two hours in the night, then you cannot sleep. It creates such awareness in you that that awareness continues the whole night.”
And if somebody is doing Vipassana for ten hours, almost the whole day, the sanity will give way. And then Goenka will not come to help, because he will not even be able to understand that this has happened because of Vipassana. And you cannot sue him in the court, because even the law does not understand that Vipassana can create madness in people.
My whole effort here is to keep you as non-serious as possible, for the simple reason that meditation, all kinds of meditation, can make you too serious and that seriousness will create a spiritual disease and nothing else.
Unless a meditation brings you more laughter, more joy, more playfulness, avoid it. It is not for you.
The generation gap is unfortunate. I am not in favor of it. I have my own strategy for how it can be avoided.
The whole system of education has to be changed from the very roots. In short…we prepare people in education for livelihood rather than life. For twenty-five years we prepare – that is one third of the life – for livelihood. We never prepare people for death, and life is only seventy years; death is the door to eternity. It needs tremendous training.
According to me – and I feel with great authority that this is going to happen in the future if man survives – that education should be cut into pieces: fifteen years for livelihood, and again after forty-two years, ten years in preparing for death. Education should be divided in two parts. Everybody goes to the university – of course to different universities, or to the same university but to different departments. One is to prepare children for life and one is to prepare people who have lived life and now want to know something more, beyond life.
Then the generation gap will disappear. Then the people who are of an older age will be more quiet, more silent, more peaceful, more wise; their advice will be worth listening to. Just sitting at their feet will be a great blessing; the respect for the old will return. Except this, there is no other way.
Education divided in two parts means young people study for life, and middle-aged people study for death. Of course, the middle-aged people will be studying meditation, singing, dancing, laughing; they will be learning celebration. They have to make their death a festival – that should be the goal of the second part of education.
They will paint, they will play music, they will sculpt, they will compose poetry; they will do all kinds of creative things. Livelihood they have managed; now their children are doing that. Geography, history and all kinds of idiotic subjects, their children are learning. Let them know where Timbuktu is.
I have always wondered why – with my geography teacher I was continually in conflict – “Why should I know where Timbuktu is? What business is it of mine?”
He said, “You are strange, nobody has ever asked this.”
I said, “I am going to ask on every point…Constantinople, which in Hindi becomes even worse: Kustuntunia. I have no business with these things. Teach me something valuable.”
And my geography teacher used to hit his head…he would say, “The whole of geography is this!”
The history teacher was teaching about the ugliest people that have existed in the world. From the history teacher I never got any idea about Bodhidharma or Zarathustra or Baal Shem Tov or Lin Chi or Chuang Tzu; I never got any idea, and these are the people who have made humanity evolve.
But I have heard about Tamerlane. Do you know what lang means? He was one-legged. It is Tamurlang. Giving him respect, nobody called him “one-legged Tamer” but he created so much nuisance that very few people can be compared with him. And for almost three generations…his son was worse than him, and his grandson defeated both.
About these people, who were just murderers and criminals, the whole history is full. And they are called emperors, conquerors, “Alexander the Great.” Even if they were really bad, still history repeats their names, their great acts: “Ivan the Terrible!”
This kind of history is bound to create wrong kinds of people in the world. All these histories should be burned simultaneously all over the world, so all these names disappear completely. And they should be replaced by those beautiful people who have all the credit for your being human. They are the people who have made humanity worthy of respect, who have given it a dignity and a pride, and who have opened doors of mysteries, of the beyond.
The second part of education should consist of meditativeness, of awareness, of witnessing, of love, of compassion, of creativity – and certainly we will again be without any generation gap. The younger person will respect the older person, and not for any formal reasons but actually because the old person is respectable. He knows something beyond the mind and the young person knows only something within the mind.
The young person is still struggling in the trivia of the world, and the older person has gone beyond the clouds; he has almost reached to the stars. It is not a question of etiquette to respect him. You are bound to respect him, it is absolutely a compulsion of your own heart – not a formality taught by others.
In my childhood…in India it is an absolute formality: anybody who comes as a guest, you have to touch their feet. Before my father became completely aware of my behavior he used to push down my head: “Touch the feet, the guest is God. And he is an old relative, you should follow the custom.”
One day a male goat with a beard entered just in my house. I touched his feet. My father said, “What are you doing?”
I said, “A guest is a God – and moreover with a beard! An old goat needs respect. You come here and touch his feet.”
He said, “Your mind functions in a very different way than anybody else’s.”
I said, “You have to understand it: from now onwards if I meet an old dog on the road I’m going to touch his feet, an old donkey and I’m going to touch his feet. What is the difference between an old dog, an old donkey, and your old guest? To me they look all the same. In fact the old donkey looks so philosophical; the old dog looks so ferocious, like a warrior – they have some qualities. That old fellow that you were forcing my head down for…. Next time you force my head down you will repent!”
He said, “What are you going to do?”
I said, “I will show you, because I believe in doing things, not in saying things.”
Next time one of my faraway relatives came and my father forgot. He pushed my head down. And I had a big needle ready in my hand, so I pushed the needle into the old man’s foot. He shrieked. He almost jumped. My father said, “What has happened?”
I said, “I have warned you, but you never listened. I don’t have any respect for this person. I don’t know him, I have never seen him before; why should I touch his feet? I am ready to touch the feet of someone whom I feel is respectable.” He understood that it is better not to force me because this was dangerous. Blood was coming out of that old man’s foot.
I never stood in my university classes when the professors entered. In India you have to stand up. The professors looked immediately at me – forgot everybody else; they focused on me. And if it was just the beginning of the year they would ask, “Why are you not standing?”
I said, “There is no reason.”
And the professor would say, “You don’t understand. Have you never stood before in any class?”
I said, “Never, because I don’t find any reason. I’m perfectly at ease.”
He said, “You…. How to make you understand that when a professor enters into the class, out of respect you have to stand up?”
I said, “That’s right. But I have not seen yet anything respectable in you. If I see something, I will stand up. And remember: there should not be double standards.”
“You mean…” he said, “what do you mean?”
I said, “I mean if I enter the class, you have to stand up – of course, only if you see something respectable in me. Otherwise there is no question, you can remain sitting down, or if you want you can even sleep. I don’t care a bit.”
My professors used to try to persuade me. Once in a while the vice-chancellor would come on a round, and they would try to persuade me that “Just for once…we don’t want you to stand for us, but when the vice-chancellor comes into the class, don’t create a fuss. Because then nothing else happens except the discussion about it.”
I said, “I am helpless. I cannot do anything against my will. Let the man come. If I feel that he is respectable I will stand up. You don’t have to tell me.”
And the first vice-chancellor under whom I was studying, the first time he came into the class he was drunk. And I am so allergic that I immediately felt that he was drunk. I remained sitting. The teacher looked at me, stared at me, gave indications that “You stand up.” I remained sitting. When everybody was told to sit down, then I stood up.
I said, “Now is the time for me to stand up. This man is drunk. It does not matter who he is, I am going to report him to the police.”
And the vice-chancellor was so much afraid and so nervous…. He had put his hat on the table. In a hurry he took my professor’s hat and went out of the class. And my professor was running behind him to say, “You are taking my hat.”
I said, “You see what happens when you are drunk? That man has not even the guts to remain here and you wanted me to stand for him?”
The generation gap exists simply because the reason for respect has disappeared. Unless you create the reason again, the respect will not return. On the contrary, every kind of disrespect will take place. But it is possible to change the whole system.
I would love that the older people be not just old but also wise, not just in age but also in understanding, not only horizontally old but also vertically old…not only growing old but growing up also.
A society where old people are still behaving like young fools is not a society worth calling cultured or civilized. Old people should behave like enlightened people – not only behave, they should be enlightened. They should become a light to those who are still young and under biological infatuations, natural bondages. They have gone beyond; they can become guiding stars.
When education for death and education for livelihood are separated, when everybody goes twice to the university – first to learn how to go around this world of trivia and the second time to learn about eternity – the gap will disappear. And it will disappear in a beautiful way.

Osho,
I'm in a hurry to become enlightened. What should I do?
First just listen carefully to this small story.

The plane had just taken off and the captain was telling the passengers about the altitude of the plane, the cruising speed et cetera. But he forgot to switch off the microphone.
He then turned to his copilot and said, “First I’m going to have a cup of tea and then I’m going to screw that pretty stewardess, Denise.”
The shocked stewardess was down the end of the plane when she heard this come over the loudspeaker. So she began to rush down the aisle to tell the captain to switch off his mike.
Halfway down the plane an old lady stopped her and said, “There’s no hurry, Denise, let him have his cup of tea first.”

There is no hurry at all. First have your cup of tea!
Enlightenment will be coming, just you have to learn waiting for it. Hurry will not help. Hurry is going to hinder.
The only thing that is a hindrance is hurry.
The moment you are in a hurry you are never here; you are looking far ahead. You are running. And for enlightenment you have to be still and silent and in this moment – utterly still, because this whole pilgrimage is from here to here.
For centuries people have been hurrying, and missing. I teach you a totally different approach: of being here, without any hurry – the whole eternity is there. And don’t be a beggar: the moment you are ready and ripe, enlightenment will happen.
Trust existence.
This is the only thing worthwhile for those who are interested in becoming enlightened. Trust existence that whatever is needed, for whatever you are worthy, it will be given to you. You need not even ask for it. Only the unworthy ask; only the undeserving desire. The deserving remain silent; the worthy never demand, but when it happens they are full of gratitude. They wait, they allow the spring to come at its own pace, and when the flowers start blossoming they enjoy the fragrance with tremendous prayer in their hearts, of gratitude.
The very desire to be in a hurry can lead you in a wrong direction, because there are peddlers all around who are ready to give you enlightenment instantly. That’s why I told you: first have your cup of coffee – that means instant coffee…but let enlightenment come on its own.

One day a young woman was walking home when a man grabbed her, dragged her into a back alley, and started molesting her.
“Help! Help me someone,” she cried. “I’m being robbed!”
“You are not being robbed, lady,” interrupted the man, “you are being screwed.”
“Well,” she replied, “if this is being screwed, then I have always been robbed before.”

Don’t get mixed up. Everything in the world needs hurry, because so many people are running for it. You cannot wait; otherwise you won’t get it. You have to trample people, you have to go ahead without thinking what means you are adopting. Even if people are to be killed, kill, but remain ahead; otherwise you are going to miss. That is one dimension of life – of trivia, of meaningless things, money, power, prestige.
But there is another dimension where there is no need to be in a hurry, because there is no competitor. You are alone. In your inner world nobody can enter. In your stillness you suddenly find yourself, absolutely alone, surrounded by nothingness. Just rejoice in it, relish it. Your enjoyment of your aloneness and nothingness will make you ripe for the enlightenment to happen.
It happens.
I can say it to you because it has happened to me. I am not depending on any Gautam Buddha or any Jesus Christ. Whatever I am saying I am saying with my own signature. Hence I can say with absolute authority without any hesitation: there is no need to worry. It comes, and it comes without giving you any advance notice. It comes so silently that you cannot even hear its footsteps.
You just have to be ready and ripe, and to be ready and ripe there is only one way: be still and wait. Don’t move, not even in your thoughts, not even in your emotions…just a pure pillar of stillness. And suddenly there is the explosion, and where there was darkness is light and where there was death is pure life and where there was sadness is just an explosion of song and dance and laughter.
But never think in terms of hurry. That is a hindrance. Be patient.

============================================================

Osho,
I thought I heard you say that if one goes deeply into sex it will eventually drop off by itself. I have thought long and hard about this, desperately trying to penetrate its hidden meaning, but all I got was a headache.
Devageet, it is a good sign, the headache – the beginning of the revolution. Only one thing you misunderstood. I have not said that sex will fall off, you will fall off – but enlightened, don’t be worried.
Here people die only enlightened; otherwise they hang around, hang around, go deep and go hard…and one day they drop off. And this dropping off is really entering into eternity. You would not need any meditation. Meditation is needed for those who cannot think too hard and too deeply. The headache indicates what is going to happen to you…
But it does not matter whether sex falls off or you fall off. Your physical, mental, social personality is what you know about yourself. The moment sex drops off, you become for the first time really alone – because sex is your relationship with the world. For the first time you become immaterial, because sex is binding you to matter. For the first time you become transcendental to your body and biology.
The death of biology or chemistry or society in you is, in other words, the resurrection of your real life.
I have always loved the story about Jesus. Christians have misunderstood him, as usual; they thought that it was really a factual resurrection – bodily, biologically, psychologically. That’s where they have missed the point. He certainly resurrected, but in a spiritual sense. He died on the cross as a physical personality, and he resurrected as a spiritual being.
So whether sex drops or you drop – because you and sex are almost synonymous – what remains is your authentic life.
So, Devageet, you are moving on the right path. Headache…and the head will drop off; then other aches and other things will start dropping off. Finally you will be left only with that which is immortal. And that is our whole search, that’s what we are seeking. These things which can be taken away will be taken away; only that which cannot be taken away from you is yours.
A reporter once asked Winston Churchill whether he agreed with the prediction that women would rule the world by the year 2000.
Churchill replied, “Yes, they will still be at it.”
Woman is also a symbolic word. To man it represents nothing but sex. If you take it literally, then Churchill is to be condemned for condemning women. But if you take its metaphorical meaning, then woman is replaced by sex; that’s what it represents in man’s mind. And sex has been ruling over the world from the very beginning, if there was any beginning, and is going to rule man to the very end – if there is an end.
Only a few people have transcended the physical, the sexual, the psychological, and have entered into a different dimension that I call enlightenment. And unless the enlightened are listened to, understood, there is no hope for the world.
It is not that millions of enlightened people are needed; just two hundred enlightened people on the earth, and the whole earth will be dazzling with their light, with their being. And those two hundred will create chain reactions: they will provoke you for the great pilgrimage, they will remind you who you are. Just looking into their eyes, suddenly inside you will click – it is only a click – and the whole dimension changes.

Paddy and his friend Sean were sitting in a bar moaning to each other, talking about how ugly their wives are – a common topic among husbands.
“My wife is so ugly,” said Sean, “if I want to make love to her I have to put a bag over her head.”
“That’s nothing,” said Paddy. “My wife was so ugly when she was born that the doctor slapped her mother.”

But these statements have become ugly in the sense that they have forgotten that instead of woman they should use the word sex, because that’s what it means in the deepest core of the mind of the male.
As far as women are concerned, they are not interested in man’s physical body; they are not interested in his ideological, philosophical, mental gymnastics. Their approach is far more direct: they simply see your spirituality. The thing a woman is attracted to is the charisma, the aura of spirituality around a man; hence they never talk about the ugliness or beauty of men. That is not their concern. That is a great difference between the approaches of men and women.
Women go directly deep inside men. That’s why it is one of the most difficult things to keep a secret from the woman: where will you keep it? – she goes directly inside you. And she is capable of going directly inside you because man has lived very superficially. Many men are not aware that they have hearts. Yes, they know they have lungs, but the lung is not the heart; neither is the brain the mind, nor is the mind your being. These are superficial layers.
No woman in the whole world has created any ideology, any great metaphysics, any great philosophy. Her concern is not the outside; her concern is the inside. That’s why I have immense respect for women. Perhaps no man in the whole world ever had as much respect for women as I have.
Women have been loved, but not respected. And without respect the love is nothing but lust; you label it with a beautiful word, but deep down inside you it is always sex, always sex. Man has reduced woman and her spirituality to such a state that she has become only an object of sex.
And if the American trend has to be followed – where everything has to be used once and thrown away – the ultimate consequence is coming closer: use the woman once and throw away. They are already doing it in a way….
In America, three years is the limit for everything. People change their jobs every three years, they change their cities every three years, they change their wives every three years. But those three years will get smaller and smaller – perhaps even by the time the honeymoon ends, everything has ended. Most probably it has ended. But people go on pretending that it is still continuing, because they have given so many promises, so many words to keep that now it looks very awkward to go against their own promises.
But a woman loves in a different way. Her love has some quality of spirituality. Man’s love is only physiological, biological. You may not have found a single joke in any language of the world from women against men. It is below her prestige. All jokes are from men against the woman, because for him woman is not a spiritual being at all.
In China for thousands of years the woman was accepted by law as a commodity that a man possesses. He can bargain, he can stake her in gambling, he can sell her, he can even kill her – the court was not concerned. If you kill your chair you will not be arrested…the woman was not more than that. And the whole past has been so ugly that man has not even asked forgiveness for it.
Women have been treated like cattle. But the woman has not, in spite of all this ugliness that has been done to her, changed at all. She still loves…and her love has a purity and a beauty and a grace. Man’s love is ugly, animalistic; it is not more than a sneeze – he is just relieving himself. But the woman is not relieving; she is living it with its totality. It is a prayer to her, as sacred as any prayer can be.
These are the differences that have to be bridged. At least for my people I want these differences to be bridged. Just as we don’t discriminate between religions, we don’t discriminate between nations, we don’t discriminate between races, the final discrimination that has to be dropped is between men and women. They both are beautiful. If they become a little more alert, they are in fact two complementaries of one whole: man is half, just as the woman is half.
My effort, in spite of the whole world’s condemnation of me, is to bring man and woman to a space where they can accept each other as their other part, as their other pole. I don’t care about the condemnation of the world; it simply brings giggles to me. Who cares about idiots condemning you? – they are not even worth any reply. But even if a small section of society starts respecting each other, there will be a tremendous revolution.
My own understanding is that as your love deepens, your sex disappears – because love is so fulfilling, what is the need of this bullock-cart sex? It is out of date….
And soon the day will come when children will not be born out of men and women’s sex. We have suffered very much: blind children, retarded children, have had to live their life in utter agony and suffering…but there were no means to clear the situation. But now we have the means, now love can be completely a fun, a joy, a celebration, with no responsibility, no fear of making the woman pregnant, because that keeps her in bondage and that keeps you also in the bondage. You are partners in creating a child; now you have to be a partner in bringing him up.

I have heard…in a court a man, ninety-five years old, and a woman, ninety-one years old, appeared for divorce. The judge had seen many cases but this was really shocking. He could not believe it: one foot is already in the grave; for what do they want a divorce?
He asked, “How long have you been married?”
They said, “It is very difficult to remember. Maybe seventy-five years, or it could be a little more.”
The judge said, “I cannot understand: you managed to live together for seventy years, and now at the very end you have come to divorce.”
They said, “We had to wait for all our children to die. Now we are completely free, no burden.”

Man’s past history, Devageet, has been really not human. It can be human only if the woman and the man are no longer just sex partners; that drags them both to the very lowliest spaces. If they can love each other with respect, not using each other as commodities, men and women both will have a great uprising of consciousness.
The more your sex energy becomes love, the more you are a spiritual being. Sex is only a reproductive process forced by nature on you. Nature has been using you just like a factory – and you don’t have even the dignity to declare, “I am not a factory.”
But this can happen only if you are alert, aware, conscious of what you are doing, what you are thinking, how you are behaving. And that brings such grace and such beauty, that the physical beauty simply disappears. I have seen many beautiful women with very ugly minds. I have seen many beautiful men, but their beauty is not more than skin-deep. And this is the trouble: beauty is always skin-deep, and ugliness goes to the very bones. Go on digging to the bones, to the marrow, and you will find it…it is there.
Love is the alchemy to change that ugliness from within. And once it disappears from within, even an ordinary face, a homely face, starts shining with the bliss and joy of the beyond.
Don’t be worried about the headache; the headache is simply an effort of biology to drag you back. I have not suffered almost for thirty years from a headache. Slowly, slowly I have forgotten how it feels. And because I have not suffered from headache, I don’t feel my head either. It is only pain that makes you feel anything. But thirty years before I have also suffered from headache, and the headache is certainly concerned very deeply with sex.
No medical researcher has come to the conclusion, but I say it from my own discoveries that I go on and on making – I’m an incurable discoverer – and sooner or later science will have to agree with me. The sex center exists in the head, not in the genitals – that much science has come to know. And if the sex center exists in the head and not in the genitals, then sex deprivation can create a headache. It will not create genital ache because there is nothing…it is only an extension of a certain center in your mind.
Why have people started thinking – and doctors have started even advising their patients – that sex is good for your mental health? And they are right: all the people who have repressed sex in the past in the name of religion, have suffered tremendously with headaches. Even a man like J. Krishnamurti suffered for forty years continuously with such great headaches, migraine, that even he, a man of such understanding, used to think of hitting his head with the wall and be finished – the pain was too much.
J. Krishnamurti was brought up by people with all the old ideas: Repress your sex. He was not allowed to meet young women. Even when a woman who was almost the age of his mother once had been taking care of him when he was sick, immediately great turmoil started in the leadership of the Theosophical Society: “They have fallen in love. Remove the woman” – and the woman was removed. It was sheer stupidity: Krishnamurti was not more than fifteen, and the woman was nearabout fifty. But the woman was a beautiful woman, very understanding. No man can take care of anybody else the way a woman can take care even of strangers.
I was in jail in America. They had put me in the medical ward, so that nobody could say that I had been tortured, harassed. In the medical ward there were six women nurses and a doctor, and one male nurse. It never used to be that way in the past. In fact, in this country you cannot find a male nurse; in this country ‘nurse’ means a woman. A male nurse looks awkward, unpsychological.
I watched the way the woman doctor behaved with me – with such respect and such love. And all the nurses…the oldest nurse – a very womanly woman, almost a Jewish mama – took care of me so much that during the three days I was there she dropped one of her holidays. She said, “I cannot go out….”
All the nurses behaved as though I had been known to them forever: I was not a stranger but part of their heart. But the male nurse was a trouble. One day only was given to the male nurse in seven days, but that one day he tortured me – not physically, but he would come into my cabin and he would start asking questions…and religion and theology and philosophy….
I told him, “Listen…with great difficulty I have got these few days’ holiday, and you are destroying that. I have forgotten all about religion, all about philosophy, I don’t know anything. Just don’t torture me.”
But the male mind functions only intellectually; it does not know anything about the heart. Not a single woman in the medical ward ever asked a single question. They brought my food, they managed…the doctor managed that I should not go to the common toilet, she gave me her own bathroom: “We will feel ashamed to send you there, it is dirty. All criminals…While you are here just use my bathroom, and I will remember it: because you have used my bathroom, it becomes a temple for me. The moment I enter it I will remember you.”
The head nurse has never gone in her life to purchase things for the prisoners; they come on a fixed routine basis. But for me she used to go every day – and she was an old woman – to purchase fruits, vegetables, anything that was vegetarian. I asked her, “You are unnecessarily taking trouble. Things come, they are perfectly good. If they are good for other human beings, they are good for me too. Just take care because I am a vegetarian.”
She said, “No, those things come mixed with non-vegetarian food. And you are here only for a few days.”
The last day when I left the first jail, all the nurses and the doctor and the sheriff and the whole staff had tears in their eyes. The doctor said to me, “We don’t want you to leave.”
I said, “It is a jail. As far as I am concerned there is no problem, I can remain here. But millions of people around the world are waiting for me to get out. Your tears prevent me…it looks very heartless.”
She said, “No, I understand. Just in three days you have become so much part of us, we have forgotten completely that you are a prisoner here” – because the whole day I was sitting in the doctor’s room. To make me comfortable, she had moved to another room – because there prisoners will be coming, patients will be coming – and they did everything that a loving family can do.
She said, “Forgive my tears. Don’t take any note of it. It is my problem that we will miss you from tomorrow.”
When I shook hands with the nurses they were all trembling. They had all cut photos from newspapers and they said, “Please, give a signature and write my name. This is our most precious gift. We are enough rewarded…otherwise this jail is a torture house. Even in the medical part the torture continues; it is just a strategy to show to the world that a sick person is not tortured.”
But because the whole staff was in such a deep loving attitude, they could not do anything to torture me. The nurses brought soaps from their homes, new combs from their homes. If they cooked something which was vegetarian they brought it from their home. I said, “Why are you taking so much care of a prisoner?”
They said, “You are not a prisoner. You have changed the whole climate of the medical ward.”
But it is to happen all over the world…. The woman has to be respected, not only used. And slowly, slowly you will see that sex is the lowliest form of relationship. It will drop. Just go a little higher in your consciousness…But I don’t want you to drop it with effort, deliberately, because then it will cling around you. Go into it. It is our destiny to pass through that fire test.
And once you have gone through it and come out of it into the clear, meditation becomes so easy that you don’t have to do it. Just sit by the side of any tree and from all over a subtle showering of a new silence, of a virgin serenity, starts falling over you, just like rain, or just like flowers of madhukamini falling in thousands.
I have not seen any other plant which has so generous a heart as madhukamini. The word madhukamini means “honey woman.” Its fragrance is incomparable. And the most beautiful thing is that it goes on showering almost like water, rainwater. The petals of its flowers go on falling the whole night. You can sit underneath it and you will be all covered with flowers.
Something like this is bound to happen, Devageet, if you allow the false personality that surrounds you to die. Then love and meditation are not two things – they become one. The loving is meditative, and meditation is nothing but the radiation of love.

Osho,
In my mind I am writing to you almost every day. All these questions and statements boil down to the following: gratitude – I want to say thank you, Osho – and attention. Could you say in discourse, one single time, “Hello, Hareesh,” so everyone can hear it, so that I am certain that you and everybody else knows I am existing as your lover and fellow dance-partner?
Hello, Hareesh…. But this will not be enough. It will be just plates without anything to eat, to drink. It will look like a desert where nothing grows.
And people are saying “hello” to each other without any reason; so I say…but I would like to present you also something, so “Hello Hareesh” is not empty. My first present:

A man sitting in a bar is complaining to the bartender: “After one year and three thousand dollars with that psychiatrist, he tells me I’m cured. Some cure! A year ago, I was Nancy Reagan – now I’m nobody.”

A Roman Catholic, a famous priest, and a Protestant minister, also very famous and well-known, had a heated discussion over the merits of their respective faiths.
Finally they agreed to differ, and as they parted the Catholic said, “Let us go our ways – you continue to worship God in your way and I will continue to worship him in his way.”

The minister’s wife…my second present…was becoming upset that her husband exclaimed, “Oh, Jesus, sweet Jesus!” every time he reached orgasm.
“It’s perfectly proper, my dear,” he assured her, “and in accordance with the Bible where it says, ‘Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord.’”

And the third:

The Catholic priest heard a number of women confess that the grocer’s new delivery boy had seduced them all. He made them each put ten dollars in the poor box.
The delivery man appeared last, and the priest asked angrily: “What have you got to say for yourself?”
“Just this,” replied the boy, “either you cut me in on those ten dollars or I take my business to another parish.”

Hareesh, keep your business here!
I can understand a deep desire in everybody to be loved, and I love you all whether I know your names or not. Names are just labels stuck to you. You have come here in the world without names, and you will leave this world without names.
As far as I am concerned you don’t have a name; and if you look within yourself, you will not find any name there. You are a nameless reality – and it is good, because every name creates a boundary around you, makes you small.
But your question is significant. Attention can do two jobs: if it is forced, it nourishes the ego; if it is prayed with gratitude, it nourishes the soul.
I cannot say anything against your question. Your question is so full of love, gratitude, that I can repeat as many times as you want, “Hello, Hareesh.” It will not strengthen your ego, it will weaken it. And so many people here, hearing me calling to you, “Hello, Hareesh,” are also repeating the same. Then it becomes a tremendous energy field, a brotherhood of spirituality, where everybody is to share his abundance.
It is perfectly right. Many would have liked the same, but could not gather the courage. You are a courageous man. And you are asking “…and everybody else knows I am existing as your lover and fellow dance-partner.” Here we are not gathered to talk about nonsense – about God, heaven and hell. Here we have gathered to rejoice, to sing, to dance together in such an ecstasy that individualities melt into each other and it becomes one organic whole.
I have seen it becoming one organic whole many times, when you all laugh together. Even the Germans don’t understand why they are laughing – but they are intelligent people: seeing that everybody is laughing, they also participate. In fact, they laugh louder than anybody else, so nobody suspects that they are Germans. Of course, outside Buddha Hall they inquire of people, “What was the matter? Why were people laughing so much? I could not get it.”
My suggestion to all the German sannyasins is: Forget trying to get it – that is what is troubling you! You are engaged in trying to get it and the moment passes…. Everybody is laughing, and you are always second; you cannot laugh first because you have not got it yet.
Here it is a temple of celebration, utterly pagan. Nobody is serious, nobody is bothering about how to reach heaven, how to get a harp, sit on a cloud and go on singing for eternity, “Alleluia, alleluia….” Those are the idiots. They have been taken up just to relieve the earth.
If you can rejoice with me you have understood me.
If my music has touched your heart, it is enough.
I am not here to convert anybody; I am just here to help you learn a little dance of the soul. This is the most religious phenomenon: the dance of the soul – no fear of punishment, no greed for any reward.
This moment is all in all.

Osho,
Would you tell me a joke or give me some sutras, or anything before I leave?
Hari om tat sat…that is the starting of any Eastern holy scripture. It is a very beautiful thing: hari means a thief, om means the ultimate music of existence. Tat sat means this eternal music of existence…the thief is the only truth.
This question is from Dhyan Om. He is back. For a few days he had disappeared – not from the ashram, but he had stopped asking questions because I loved him so much that I gave him good hits. The greater hit you get, remember, your reward is much…you deserved it.
First he is asking, “Would you tell me a joke or give me some sutras, or anything before I leave?”
In the first place, why should you leave?
In the second place, you are a joke unto yourself; you don’t need any jokes. But I will not disappoint you.
A few sutras for you:
…A curved line is the loveliest distance between two points.
Get it?
I have also been a German in one of my past lives, so I understand the Germans more than anybody else.
…We are happier in many ways when we are old than when we are young. The young sow wild oats, the old grow sage.
It is really difficult…. But I will go on telling sutras until you get one.
…A cigar gives a wise man some time to think and a fool something to stick in his mouth.
…The principle thing an inquisitive child learns is how little adults know.
…You know you have reached middle age when weightlifting consists merely of standing up.
…We are all born mad; some remain so.

I will not say to which category Om belongs. Most probably he has remained so.
…Behind every successful man is an astonished woman.
…A Japanese proverb: Nothing is as ancient as progress. It started from the very moment Adam and Eve were thrown out of the Garden of Eden.
…I have heard the first words of Adam to Eve were, “We are passing through a great crisis….”
These are the first words, and they continue to be relevant every day. Thousands of years have passed, but we are passing through the greatest crisis every day.
…Any child who gets raised by the book must be a first edition.
There are books on how to raise your children, how to be a mother, how to be a father; it is so unbelievable that all the animals are raising their children without any difficulty, without reading any book. Only man seems to be utterly retarded. He needs to read how to raise his children. He has forgotten even the simplest things which any animal, any bird, knows perfectly well. Still we go on calling it evolution, for the simple reason that nobody objects. And even if they object – for example this bird is objecting – we don’t understand their language.
…Temptation usually comes in through a door that was deliberately being left open.
…A man may know his own mind and still know next to nothing.
…The latest thing in clothes is usually the woman you are waiting for.
…When you don’t know what you are doing, do it neatly.
…Beauty is only skin-deep, but ugliness goes right to the bones.
…What no wife of a philosopher can ever understand is that a philosopher is working when he is staring out of the window.
…You can be positive of anything of which others are as ignorant as you are.
It is because of such fundamental principles that God goes on existing, the devil goes on existing, heaven and hell go on existing, sin and virtue go on existing. And you can be positive, absolutely positive…because neither you know nor anybody else knows, so nobody is going to contradict, nobody is going to negate. Only an innocent person may perhaps start saying things which go against all the ignorant people of the world.
…One of the hardest decisions in life is deciding when to start middle age.
One: old age is when your symptoms are the most interesting things in your life.
Two: old age is when your face in the morning has more wrinkles than your bed.
Three: old age is when you not only cannot remember when you first made love, but also when you last did it.

That is real old age!
And you ask for a joke also. A joke that I hope can be understood…otherwise I will try another – but I will not allow you to leave this place disappointed.

First: Rabbi Gideon Finkelstein died and went to heaven. He saw only three people there, reading by a dim light. One of them was reading Playboy, another Penthouse, and the other Popular Science. He decided to see what hell was like.
The rabbi got to the devil’s domain and it turned out to be a big night club with every kind of music being played. There was an eight-piece Dixieland band, a thirty-piece swing band, three discos, and all the people were dancing.
Rabbi Finkelstein went back up to heaven and asked for an audience with God. “I don’t understand it, Lord,” he said, “there are only three people here in heaven and they are all reading. Down in hell everybody is dancing and having a good time. Why can’t we have that in heaven?”
The Lord said, “I can’t hire a band for just three people.”

And second…if you have missed the first joke, this certainly you will miss.

Three old ladies were sitting together on a park bench when a flasher walked up to them, opened his coat, and exposed himself.
The first old lady had a stroke, and the second old lady had also a stroke, but the third old lady’s arms were too short to reach.

============================================================

Osho,
Watching the mind, it seems to me there is an infinite ocean of thoughts. Meditation gives me more peace and grounding, but hearing you speak about enlightenment – it seems to me far, far away.
Can you give me some advice?
Enlightenment is as far away as you are from yourself; hence the distance differs from individual to individual.
You are certainly in a difficult position: first, you are a German, and nobody has ever heard of any German becoming enlightened. Only one of my German sannyasins used to become once in a while enlightened, and again he understood, “What am I doing? It is not for me,” and he dropped the idea. That happened many times. Just now I have heard that he is washing dishes in a Zorba the Buddha restaurant. The person who told me about him had asked him, “What happened? You had become enlightened….”
He said, “Forget all about it. Five times I became enlightened, and then I dropped the whole idea. I am feeling far happier washing dishes in the restaurant.” What was happening was that whenever he would come here he would become unenlightened, and whenever he would go to Germany he would become enlightened. In Germany there was no question, no objection; nobody has even heard what it means, so in Germany it would be easier. Here it is a little difficult.
Secondly, you are really in a big dilemma: you are a liar! First a German, and then a liar makes things very complex – otherwise enlightenment is as easy as nothing else in the world. Everything needs some effort, except enlightenment. Everything needs you to go somewhere, everything needs you to do some climbing the ladder – except enlightenment.
Enlightenment is the easiest, because it is not an achievement. Don’t make a goal of it…that’s what is making it difficult for you. If you are feeling good and grounded in meditation, you are perfectly in the right direction. Just get all your ocean of thoughts settled. Let it become a lake without any ripples.
You drop the idea of enlightenment – it is none of your business. Meditation is going well; that means the tree is growing well, the flowers will be coming in their own time, in their own season. No tree is worried, no tree is concerned about why the flowers have not come yet; they always come in their own time.
All that you have to take care of is that the tree should not die, that it should be nourished, that it should have a good soil, that it should be watered, that it should have your love, your friendship. All you can do is nourish your meditation, become more and more grounded and centered. One day suddenly, from nowhere…the explosion.
You don’t have to go to enlightenment; it comes to you. In fact, even that is not right to say. It does not come either; it happens – and it happens from your innermost core. It is an explosion, just like the explosion of an atom. Atomic explosion comes from the innermost core of the atom. Enlightenment is the explosion of your innermost life center. Suddenly all darkness is gone! A light has descended upon you from every side, and a light that needs no fuel…a light that remains, that has come forever.
Nobody can become unenlightened; that is an impossibility, that’s a difficult task – even a German cannot do that. But enlightenment becomes a problem because you go on hearing me. I am the problem. I cannot stop talking about enlightenment, and that creates the desire in you and the longing in you. Just don’t listen to me! The moment I say “Enlightenment…” simply say, “It is not for us.” If you can avoid…
You cannot make me feel responsible for it, because I am helpless, I will continue to talk, I cannot talk about anything else. Whatever I say suddenly turns out to be something about enlightenment. Just watch…

A priest went to a ranch in order to buy a horse, and saw a beautiful one that he liked and asked if he could try it. “Sure,” said the rancher, “but I have to tell you something. That horse used to be owned by the bishop, and if you want the horse to move, you have to say, ‘Good Lord,’ and if you want him to stop, you have to say, ‘Amen.’”
“That’s okay,” said the priest and jumped up and said, “Good Lord.” The horse promptly moved off and then was seen galloping in the mountains. The priest was yelling, “Good Lord, good Lord.” and the horse was really moving.
But suddenly they were coming to the edge of the cliff and, in panic, stricken with fear, he yelled, “Stop, stop!” That did not work and then he remembered and shouted, “Amen.” The horse stopped right on the edge of the cliff and, wiping his brow with his relief, the priest said, “Good Lord!”

Do you think Gautam Buddha could have made this story in any way connected with enlightenment? But I am just incurable. I see every element in it exactly leading to enlightenment. All that you need is the last “Good Lord”…finished!
There is no hurry. You are moving slowly, gradually, you are getting grounded, becoming centered, but listening to me your desire catches fire. It starts thinking, “If meditation is so beautiful, so silent, what will enlightenment be like?” And then it becomes a constant worry and a tension. It will not help you; it will even disturb your meditation.
But you should look at my trouble also. If I don’t talk about enlightenment, you are not going even to do meditation; if I talk about enlightenment, that disturbs meditation. Now you tell me the way…! So just be sane. Enlightenment comes – I can guarantee you it comes. It is not as though it is something that has not happened to many people. You have the potential for it, but you have to understand the whole process.
In the beginning the master goes on telling you all the beauties and all the blissfulness and all the ecstasies of enlightenment. He has to – otherwise who has time to meditate? Television is there, football matches are going on…. The world all around is so full of idiots doing all kinds of gymnastics: boxers are boxing, actors are acting – who has time for meditation, and for what?
If I don’t talk about enlightenment, then naturally you will ask me, “Why should I meditate?” And the moment I say “Enlightenment…” trouble arises. Then your mind is habitually making everything a goal, far away. Mind enjoys challenge, and enlightenment is not a challenge.
People even want to go to Everest.
When Edmund Hillary, the first man who reached on top of Everest, was asked by the news media, “Why did you take such a risky step of going to the highest peak of the Himalayas?” His answer was really beautiful, an answer with great understanding.
He said, “It is not a question of my going. It is just because Everest is there, unclimbed, and I cannot tolerate it. It is not troubling me, it has nothing to do with me, but simply the idea that it remains unclimbed…hundreds of people have died trying to climb it, and it has become a challenge. I will risk my whole life.” You will not gain anything….
He reached to the top, looked all around, and felt embarrassed, because there was not even somebody to say “Hello, hi, Edmund Hillary, how are you?” – not even a single tree, not even a single bird, not even a single animal, nothing. Just miles and miles of eternal snow which has never melted…He did not remain there for more than two minutes; what is the point? Man may go to the moon, man may go to Mars, man may go some day to some star. They are challenging to the mind. Mind is very interested in any challenge: provoke it, and it will go.
But enlightenment is not a goal, it is not Everest, it is not the moon. It is you. You don’t have to go anywhere, not even out of your room. You don’t have to take a single step. You have just to be silent, unmoving, and it is there. It has always been there.
So you should understand: the problem of the master is that he has first to talk about enlightenment to create a little interest, a little longing in you, and then he has immediately to make it clear to you that you should not make your longing attached to a goal. You have to find it just within yourself. No effort, no doing, no action…nothing is needed.
If you can simply remain meditating and enjoying the silence and the peace of it, you have done whatever is needed on your part. Now leave enlightenment to existence. Existence is not miserly; it is not exhausted because a few people have become enlightened. There is no quota, that only so many people can become enlightened. The whole world can become enlightened, everybody has the intrinsic potential; you just have to disconnect your meditation from any goal-orientation, from any motivation. It is not difficult if you understand: just a little intelligence…
But we live in a world where intelligence is not valued, where the mediocres rule, where the mediocres are the leaders…where the intelligent people simply get out of the crowd, they don’t want to be unnecessarily hassled and hustled in the crowd; they stand by the road and let the crowd pass. Once you become aware of the strangeness of the people around you, you will be surprised: how have you been missing it up to now?
Just today Neelam has brought a news which has been published by all the newspapers of India. The statement is from a man called Devaraha Baba, who is worshipped by thousands of Hindus, thought to be a great saint. All his qualities for being a great saint are very peculiar. One is that for twelve years he was standing in the water day in, day out. He will eat standing up to his chest in the water, he will do everything there: that made him known nationwide, a great man. Somehow people persuaded him that “it is enough, twelve years…” Just out of compassion he came out of the river, and since then he has been sitting in a small hut made for him on a tree. These are his two qualifications for being one of the representatives of Hinduism.
His statement was just according to his qualifications. The statement was that the world can be saved, all problems can be solved, if only cow slaughter is stopped. Now his statement is being published by every newspaper without a single criticism – but my statement will not be published by anyone. Now this is sheer stupidity, not intelligence. How can the world’s problems be solved by stopping cow slaughter? But in India it is a very common way of thinking….
Mahatma Gandhi used to think that if everybody starts spinning his own clothes, all problems will be solved. India is great in finding simple solutions! Now Maharishi Mahesh Yogi is saying that if people start learning yogic hopping, which he calls yogic flying, all problems will be solved. There will be peace, serenity, no war, no hunger.
And I am amazed that nobody criticizes them, nobody holds them by the neck and tells them, “You idiot!…” The world is suffering with so many complex problems, and you are suggesting that somebody sitting in the lotus posture, hopping, will solve all the problems. Nuclear weapons will disappear, communism will not be against capitalism, Russia will become a democracy, America will distribute all its wealth to the poor, the West will distribute all its products to the poor countries – just because a few idiots are sitting in the lotus posture and hopping. I cannot even conceive in my dream…
Perhaps that’s why I have stopped dreaming for thirty years. I have not dreamt for thirty years – what to dream? And if you call these people idiots, immediately somebody’s religious feeling is hurt. Immediately an arrest warrant…I have been summoned thousands of times – I have even forgotten the number – and how many times have they issued arrest warrants for the single reason that I have made some reasonable statement?
It is a very unreasonable, almost insane world in which you are living. If you can manage just to meditate, you have done more than is expected of the contemporary man. And your meditation is going good. Just go on saying, “Good Lord!” In meditation there never comes any cliff. You don’t have to remember “Amen” – there is no need.
Meditation slowly, slowly turns into your enlightenment. You suddenly become aware one day, Where is that darkness? where is that continuous rush of thoughts? where has the mind gone? Suddenly you are absolutely as hollow as a bamboo; but your hollowness is not empty – it is full of joy and full of rejoicing. You will dance for no reason at all, you will sing for no reason at all, songs that you have not composed, dances that you have not learned. They are just bubbling spontaneously in your consciousness.
That is enlightenment, but don’t make it a goal.
Meditation is enough.
Everything else follows on its own.

Osho,
When you were talking about sex and meditation the other evening I got mixed up. So often before I have heard you say: “Let your sex be your meditation.” Also, how do your latest suggestions fit into the Tantra vision?
Please comment, Osho, I am puzzled.
When I said, “Let sex be your meditation,” did you do it? When I was talking about Tantra vision, what did you do about it?
It seems my work is talking and your work is listening, and then finding out contradictions – what I said yesterday, what I said the day before yesterday….
You get puzzled because you don’t do anything. If you had done sex as your meditation, the question about sex and meditation as two interests would not have arisen. Now the question has arisen that you have two interests. That means my first statement has not been heard. And I am not a person to remember what I have said yesterday; I don’t know even what I have said today – otherwise I will be in the same boat as you are, puzzled!
I go on making as many contradictions as possible without any puzzlement. It doesn’t matter. I must have said to somebody, “Let sex be your meditation.” His question must have been different, the person must have been different. It would have been possible for him to make sex his meditation.
But the person who has asked, “I have only two interests in life – sex and meditation,” cannot deceive me, whoever he is. I may not know him, but his question gives me absolute perception of his innermost being. His only interest is sex. Meditation he is putting in just to make the question look religious.
I cannot say to this person, “Let sex be your meditation.” I can say to this person, “Let meditation be your sex” – and that’s what I have said. First get finished with sex, have it as much as you want – because meditation can be done even when you will not be able to go into sex.
You can always go into meditation to the very last moment of your life – it can be postponed. But you cannot rely on whether tomorrow sex will be possible or not. It is not within your hands; it comes on its own at a certain age, and at a certain age it disappears. Then people are talking about it and thinking about it – which is perfectly good, but there is no sex at all. It is all cerebral, in the mind. And sex in the mind is the problem, not sex as a generative force.
I want to tell you that in the mind these two things, sex and meditation, cannot exist together. Sex is pulling you downwards, and meditation is pulling you upwards.

A thief was caught and brought to the court. He had not stolen anything, but some drama was going on in the house, and he forgot completely for what he had come there. And he enjoyed the drama so much that he was caught. The court asked him, “Why did you remain the whole night, and not steal anything? For what have you entered? You are a well-known thief.”
He had been to jail many times, and it was the same judge. He said, “I know you perfectly well, but this is strange, something new. You have not stolen anything, and still you remained inside the house the whole night.”
The thief said, “These things we can discuss later on. First I want Your Honor to make it absolutely clear to me that one punishment you will not give me. You can send me to the gallows…but don’t tell me to be married to two women.”
The magistrate said, “What nonsense are you talking? There is no punishment like that.”
He said, “Then it is perfectly okay. That is the problem. I had gone into the house to steal…. But the man has two wives, and one lives on the first floor, one lives on the ground floor. The man was being pulled by one upwards and by the other downwards. And it was such a funny scene – one was pulling him by his hairs, the other was pulling by his legs – that I forgot completely for what I had come there.
“I enjoyed it so much that I started giggling, and that’s how I got caught. If I had remained silent there was no problem, I would have escaped very easily. But the poor man…that’s why I said to you from the very beginning, ‘Just don’t give me that punishment!’ One woman is enough, two women are too much.”

The man who is saying, “Sex and meditation are my two interests…” if I say to him, “Yes, go ahead,” he will be torn apart. Sex will give him continuous downward gravitation and meditation will try to pull him out of the hands, the chains and the forces of gravitation that pull you down.
Meditation is a way to open your wings and fly into the sky. It does not believe in gravitation. You cannot have both.
So always remember: if I am saying something, do it. You are not here as my examiners so that you have to find out what contradictions I have been telling you. But people take such self-appointed positions….
Now Sarjano has written a letter to me. He goes on writing stupid letters almost every day. Just because last night, when I went out, Avirbhava was on the outside door to open the car…And I have my own way of relating to people; I scare her, and she is so innocent, she gets scared – at least she pretends. She never disappoints me, “No…” Who is Sarjano to write to me, “I cannot forgive you that you scare simple Avirbhava.” Now, who is he?
I used to think that Swabhav is in charge of the ashram…has there been some change? Sarjano is neither in charge of the ashram, nor is Sarjano a guardian to Avirbhava, nor is Sarjano my boss. So who gives him all these appointments? He cannot forgive me! – and who has asked him that he should forgive me? I will not ask even God himself to forgive me. Even if I can manage to forgive God, that will be enough. For this whole stupid idea that is going on all around, God is responsible – if he is still alive. And the day I am going to encounter him is going to be really the last judgment day!
But who are you to judge me, in my own place, amongst my own people? First he was a disciple; it seems now he has become my master.
I will read your question again to make it clear so that you never repeat such stupid ideas again. You have not done anything, whatever I have said; you are just listening and waiting to find contradictions. What will you get out of it? It is a well-known thing that only idiots are not contradictory; they are absolutely consistent.
It needs a little intelligence to be inconsistent, and it needs immense intelligence to be contradictory. Why does it need immense intelligence? – because unless you can prove your contradictions are complementaries of an organic unity, you don’t have the right to make any contradictions. I have never made any contradiction, because I can prove to you each contradiction has its own function in the organic whole where opposites meet and merge and mingle into one unity.
You are not supposed to be here to bother about these things. But this is how people are. Somebody is worried….
Just today there was an article by Vijayanand. Eight years before he left me; in these eight years so much water has gone down the Ganges, and so many idiots have come and gone here that I cannot remember the names of all of them. Now he goes on writing articles against me, and today’s article I was amazed at. What are his objections? He left me because a man who has ninety-three Rolls Royces, dozens of watches, cannot be enlightened.
But he left me in ‘78, when I had not yet gone to America – and the reason why he left me was still to happen five years afterwards! He seems to be an astrologer or a palmist or a prophet. And he should know that those cars did not belong to me: I have never looked back at what happened to those cars, I have never bothered to inquire of anybody what happened to those cars.
Here I am a guest, I don’t possess anything; whatever my people provide me I use. If they stop providing me even clothes, I will still be delivering lectures, naked! It does not matter.
All those ninety-three cars were not mine. I had never had – or for almost thirty-five years, even touched – money. I don’t have any pockets to keep it; I dropped having pockets thirty-five years ago. I don’t have any bank account. Perhaps I may be the only man in the world who can be called the richest poor man – richest because I am loved by my people so much that what more do you need. People accumulate money because they are afraid no one is going to take care of them. I’m not worried; I know there are millions of people who would like to take care of me.
Why should I bother having a bank account and paying income tax? I have not paid any income tax to anybody, I have never purchased a ticket in thirty-five years. Somebody purchases it…somebody keeps it…I don’t know. I don’t know who has my passport, or even whether it exists or not!
I depend on my love, and I trust that love will manage things. And if it does not manage, that too is okay.
Vijayanand does not know that the commune we had managed in America was no ordinary commune – perhaps the greatest commune that has ever existed in the whole history. Sannyasins from all over the world had put at least three hundred million dollars into the commune. They were not my property…I am giving him the whole list, so for his next article he will be able to prove that “this type of man cannot be enlightened.”
The commune had one hundred and twenty-six square miles of land – that should be mentioned as my property. The commune had one hundred more cars as well as ninety-three Rolls Royces; they should also be included – make it one hundred and ninety-three. The commune had also one hundred buses, twenty of them were fully air-conditioned – that should also be included in my property. The commune had five airplanes – that should be also included. The commune had its own cranes, its own tractors, all kinds of construction instruments, road-making mechanisms – it should all be included. Why only ninety-three Rolls Royces? – why make me poor? It had houses for five thousand people to live in, and it had temporary houses for twenty thousand people, ready any time to be erected. But do you think all that was my property? Do you think anything here is my property?
But these hungry, starving, greedy, sexually repressed Indians, but pretending to be spiritual, are worried unnecessarily. If I am not worried – and I have never gone to see the garage where those ninety-three Rolls Royces were. The director of that garage is here, and I have been telling him, “I will be coming some day” – but I knew and he knew that I would be the last person to come there.
He made a beautiful place and he kept those cars with care, with such care that the president of Rolls Royce himself had come to see and was amazed. He said, “The cars, the way you are keeping them – even we are not keeping our new cars with such care.” Now all those cars are being exhibited in the great cities of America, on television, because one of the sannyasins had painted almost thirty cars in psychedelic colors. All those thirty cars have been purchased by some oil king in the Middle East.
…But nothing belonged to me. I have never looked backwards.
Why should these idiots be interested that I had ninety-three Rolls Royces? They want to prove that if a man has ninety-three Rolls Royces he cannot be enlightened – that is the rationale of the whole article. If that is true, then Vijayanand has to answer that if Krishna can be a perfect incarnation of God with sixteen thousand wives, what is the problem with ninety-three Rolls Royces? – at least they are not sex objects. If Krishna and Rama and Parasuram, Hindu gods, could have golden chariots, solid gold, and still be gods, what is wrong in having ninety-three Rolls Royces?
And they were not mine at all. It is a strange thing that the whole news media goes on insisting that those cars were owned by me. If those cars were owned by me, then those cars should be here. The government of America has no right to my cars.
Those watches were not mine. Now they are going to…They have exhibited first those watches all over America. One cannot think governments and politicians can be so ugly: in the first place not returning those watches to the commune – because it was commune property. If it was my property I could have claimed it; but it was not my property, so naturally I cannot claim anything. And now they are auctioning those watches on the sixteenth in Christie’s in New York.
Vijayanand is trying to prove that I am not enlightened. But that should not trouble him…. Even if I am not enlightened, I am not a problem to him: I don’t harass him, I don’t haunt him. But for eight years continuously he has not been here, and he has been haunted by me. He seems to be something of a nutcase. He should just look into the Hindu scriptures, full of pornography; he should look at the highest Hindu trinity of gods: all have wives, and all are so infatuated with women that even to call them gods is simply nonsense.
When Shiva’s wife died – he was one of the trinity – he proved himself almost to be an insane man. I will not call him a god; I will not call him even a sane man, because for twelve years he carried the dead body of his wife all around the country in search of some physician who may be able to cure her of death. Now, any idiot knows nobody is cured of death; death is not a disease, it has no medicine. This man must have been insane. Even ordinary people have more sanity. But these people are gods, they are enlightened by their very birth!
One should always remember: people who live in glass houses should not throw stones at anybody else. I can destroy their whole Hindu mythology without any effort. It just needs exposure – it is so full of bullshit.
And as far as I am concerned, I have declared myself to have gone beyond enlightenment just to get rid of all these idiots. So now there is no problem for them – I have already gone beyond. They don’t have to be worried about me. I have left enlightenment also far behind. I am just an ordinary man.
But something goes on hurting their egos. What hurts these people? – my silence? my love? my blissfulness? Everything hurts them, because everything shows that they are living in gutters, and they don’t know the flight of an eagle in the sky across the sun.
But when I find people here too behaving that way, then certainly I start thinking that I committed a mistake by becoming enlightened. I could have lived at ease without any idiot telling me that he cannot forgive me…and I have not done anything to him.
I will tell Avirbhava to find this Sarjano; he needs to apologize to Avirbhava. It is just out of my love, and everybody knows it: whenever I see her, I like to scare her a little – and she enjoys it. Many times I wanted to pass without scaring her, and I felt, “No, it is not good, because she will be expecting it and I am going without doing it. It is inhuman….” But what Sarjano has the right to say any such thing to me?
You should be completely aware here.
If you are here, you are here to learn something, not to teach. First become capable of teaching something, then people will come to you. But don’t try to impose yourself and appoint yourself as a judge.
This man Vijayanand had come to the ashram just to hide, and out of my compassion I allowed him. Otherwise I would have told him, “Just get lost. There is no place for you here”…because of what he had done. He was in love with his sister’s daughter, which is absolutely against Hindu culture, Hindu religion, Indian mind – and it is also wrong hygienically, scientifically, medically.
I support the Hindu idea because not only is it morally wrong, it is scientifically wrong to be married with such a close relationship. Your sister’s daughter is your daughter: to be married to your daughter…That’s why he had left Mumbai – because he was harassed and tortured by his family and by others: “What are you doing…?”
I gave him shelter – that was my fault – I told him he could remain here, nobody would bother here. Perhaps he has not been able to forgive me because I know the secret, and I know the real reason was not any spirituality, not any meditation, nothing but a shelter. He has not been able to forgive me; otherwise, for eight years continuously he goes on writing for no reason. This is for the first time…I thought it is better to say something, because this idiot is not going to stop without hammering his skull as hard as possible.
And what did he do here? Out of fear he sent his sister’s daughter to England, because the whole family was against, and the whole community where he lived and the whole industry – he is a director in the film industry – was against. All his brothers are famous actors, directors – they were all against. So he sent the girl away, and here he married another girl just to cool things down, so the Mumbai people start thinking, “Now the problem is finished, he has married a girl.” And that was a pure deception, an ugly, inhuman behavior.
He married the girl just to cool down the heat that was against him; and once the heat was cooled down he dropped the girl. He called the girl whom he really wanted to marry, his own sister’s daughter, and he married her – he committed bigamy too. The girl he married belonged to a very high-class family in Delhi. She had come here to meditate, but got infatuated with the idea…. He bribed her, he blackmailed her by telling her that he was a director – and he is a director, and a good director – that he will make her a heroine in his films.
This idea was the bribe, so she was immediately ready to marry him. He got married to her, and after the marriage he sent her back to her home in Delhi saying, “I will come and take you back….” He never went there. On the contrary, the mother of the girl came to me saying, “We don’t want this third-rate man to be married to our daughter.” They were very rich people; the daughter’s father was ambassador in Russia. She said, “If her father comes to know, he will kill me. She is my one and only child.”
I said, “I will try.” But there was no need to try. Vijayanand escaped from here. He married the other girl, and because the first marriage was not registered, he simply went to the priest who had married them, bribed him, and burnt the marriage certificate. So without a divorce he has married his own sister’s daughter.
Now all this only I know. That is the wound that he is carrying against me. I have never told anybody…. But he has been insisting for eight years continuously; now comes the limit. Now I expose him. The family of the girl that he has deceived remains silent, because they do not want to create any stir. The father was a politician and an ambassador, and even to bring it to the court would have condemned the girl and would have created trouble for the family, for her marriage. It was already silent…because Vijayanand got married again, and he denied that he had married the first girl – because he had burnt the certificate.
Knowing that I am the only person who can expose him hurts, he goes on and on writing against me, for no reason, just to create a defense around himself. I was not going to attack him: I know human stupidity, I know human insanity, I know human frailty and weakness and I have every compassion for it.
But I will not tolerate anybody here in the commune behaving as if he owns the space. If ever again I get any letter like this, you will be turned out of the door. Whoever he is – because he seems to be very tricky – one letter he writes which is absolutely ugly, then another letter he writes praising me, and great poetry and great gratefulness…this Italian spaghetti cunningness will not do here!
You are saying, “When you were talking about sex and meditation the other evening I got mixed up.” The statement looks as if you were trying to do what I had said before; otherwise, why should you get mixed up? What got mixed up? – sex and meditation?
What got mixed up? Just one thought that you had heard before and another thought that you have heard now – only two thoughts. But this place is not for thinking; this place is for going beyond thinking. And if you had meditated, there would have been no mix-up.
You are saying, “So often before I have heard you say…” So often! – you are saying exactly the same as the German sannyasin was doing: so often he became enlightened! “So often before I have heard you say: ‘Let your sex be your meditation.’” What have you done about it? Today I want to say to you, Let your meditation be your sex – no other sex, just meditation.
“Also, how do your latest suggestions fit into the Tantra Vision?” Who bothers? – when I was talking on Tantra you did not listen. Now I’m talking on other things, you are not listening. Tomorrow I may not be talking about the same things: are you going just to listen?
As far as I am concerned I have never contradicted myself. Certainly when I speak on Tantra, I speak not as a scholar on Tantra or about Tantra; I speak as an insider who knows what Tantra is. When I speak on meditation, I don’t speak about meditation; I speak about my experience of meditation.
Whatever I speak, I never speak without the support of my own experience, and in my experience there is no problem: the Tantra vision, meditation, sex, enlightenment – all come into one single organic unity.
But that does not mean…According to you, do you want me to say everything every day the same? Then what is the need for me to be here? Just a tape recorder will do.
I am not a tape recorder. I am a living human being, growing continuously, and according to my growth my answers will grow, will become different, have different colors, will have more depth, will have new angles, new dimensions. I am not a system maker; I am simply an explorer of the whole field of consciousness.
So I will make all kinds of statements. Whichever suits you, do it. Don’t be worried about my being contradictory, because that is my problem. If I am contradictory you are not going to be responsible for it. I will arrange on the last judgment day with God, who is contradictory: am I contradictory or is he contradictory? But that is my problem. God will not ask you about my contradictions, he will ask about your life, how you have lived it – have you lived it at all?
Always remember it as a criterion: if there is a God and on the final judgment day he asks you, What is in your hands? – they will be just empty. You will not have even a few flowers to offer him, because your concerns are all absolutely unnecessary, irrelevant. Your concerns should be absolutely just you, and nobody else.
First solve your own Gordian knot, first cut yourself asunder, first explode your own potentiality; and then you have the right to advise, you have the right to say something about these great things – meditation or Tantra or enlightenment. Right now you don’t have in any way, any right at all, to say anything.
Do something! Be something! Then your very being will resolve many problems that right now you feel are great problems. You think this is a great problem, and you say, “I am puzzled.” Why should you be puzzled? I should be puzzled, it is my contradiction, not yours. But I am not puzzled…nothing puzzles me.

A man was on safari in Africa, but he lost his guide and wandered deep into the jungle. Suddenly he was surrounded by hostile natives. He was at a loss what to do. But then he remembered a trick he had seen in an old movie.
He dug into his pocket, pulled out his cigarette lighter, flicked it once and a big flame popped up.
“It is a miracle,” shouted the chief, collapsing to his knees. “I have never seen a lighter that worked first time.”

If you can enjoy me, that is enough. If you can celebrate me, that is enough.

A traveling salesman, staying overnight in a hotel, found a Bible by his bed. On the front page was this inscription: “If you are sick, read page forty-two. If you are worried about your family, read page sixty-eight. If you are lonely, read page ninety-two.”
He was lonely, so he opened to page ninety-two and read it. When he had finished he noticed on the bottom of the page the hand-written words: “If you are still lonely, call 62485 and ask for Gloria.”

I call this kind of Bible really holy: this is the service of the poor, of the lonely, of the lost.
Here, you are to rejoice. This is not an academical institute; it is just a divinely mad communion of people who know how to love, how to laugh, how to sing, how to dance. And you bring academic questions, that I said something and now I am saying something else….
If you go on looking that way you will simply waste your life, because I will go on saying anything every day. But whatever I say is relevant to somebody. If you watch carefully, you should choose whatever is relevant to you, and not only keep it in your memory, but materialize into a realization.
Just a joke to make this silence deeper…. First experience this silence, so that after the laughter you can experience the deepness of it…how laughter can make silence deeper, how laughter can make love deeper, how laughter can make meditation deeper. But first, feel it….

A traveling salesman was passing through a small town in Virginia when he saw a little old man sitting in a rocking chair on the porch of his house. The little man looked so contented that the salesman could not resist going over and talking to him.
“You look as if you don’t have a care in the world,” the salesman said, “what is your formula for a long and happy life?”
“Well,” replied the little old man, “I smoke six packs of cigars a day, I drink, I enjoy a large bottle of whiskey every four hours, and six cases of beer a week. I play the guitar and I go out chasing women every night.”
“My goodness,” exclaimed the salesman. “That’s just great! And how old are you?”
The little man took the cigarette out of his mouth and said, “Twenty-five.”

============================================================

Osho,
I would like to be in synchronicity with you. Would you mind telling me what time it is, so that I can set my watch by yours?
It is not difficult for me to tell the time. But keeping your watch in synchronicity with my watch is not the real thing; your heart has to be in synchronicity with my heart. The watch will not help. Just for your consolation, on my watch it is eight-ten. But you have to synchronize with my heart, with my being.
And I know you are coming along, slow but steady…and the moment will come when your heart will beat with the same rhythm as my heart.
Your question is, in a way, significant. Superficially, it is stupid…but there have been many cases of enlightened people whose watches stopped when they died. Perhaps their disciples could not manage to synchronize with the master’s heart, but their watch did.
One famous Zen master, Bokuju even told the people that, “when my watch stops, you can understand I am gone. It beats with my heart.”
But this is not the case with me. I am in every way eccentric. Automatic watches simply stop on my hand – because an automatic watch needs some movement, and I am so still. Finally, I had to change from automatic watches and turn to quartz watches, because whether I am dead or alive they will continue. A battery does not know how to synchronize, but the automatic watch needs movement.
But I rarely make any movement and I don’t keep the watch on my hand twenty-four hours – just when I come to you, so that I remember now it is morning and I have to go to you; and in the evening when I come to you…just these four hours the watch is on my hand.
The remaining time I don’t need to know what day it is, what date it is, what time it is. My people love me so much that they know at what time they have to serve my lunch; at what time they have to put me in the bed; at what time they have to wake me up and push me into the bathroom.
And as far as days and dates are concerned, they are absolutely irrelevant to me. I have no need of any calendar. Even Neelam reminds me about the year, that it is 1987; otherwise, I have no concern. I am not in a hurry, not going towards a goal.
Once in a while, while speaking, I look at my watch; you must be thinking that I am looking at the time, but really I am looking to see whether the watch has stopped or not. If it has stopped, it is better to stop now; if it is still running, I can manage.
It was a great surprise to scientists why many people’s watches stopped when they died, exactly at that moment. Those watches were running in deep harmony with their heart; slowly, slowly those watches had become in a dance with the rhythm of the heart.
But making your watch run exactly as mine will not be of much help. You have to put your heart with my heart, you have to learn to dance with my being – and that I cannot do. I can provide the opportunity, then it is all up to your intelligence, to take it or not to take it.
If you want to be in synchronicity with me, you have to be as drunk with awareness as I am. It is a strange drunkenness: you are fully aware and still you are as drunk with joy, blissfulness as no drunkard can be. You just look at my eyes: anybody will think I am drunk. You just listen to my words: anybody will think I am drunk.
I have not drunk even water for twenty years! I have been traveling around the country, and this country has such an ugly culture that in the same rivers buffaloes are enjoying their bath, donkeys are drinking, dogs are pissing and men are standing amidst them, chanting to God – and that water is being used. It is absolutely polluted.
I have heard that America will destroy itself by its nuclear weapons, Russia will follow the same route, England will die because of its hypocrisy and its seriousness and France will die from its sexuality and sensuality. The person who was telling me, I asked him – “Because I am here now in India, tell me of what India is going to die.” He said, “Shitting all over the country!”
India is a big toilet. This is the only freedom India has – freedom to shit anywhere. I wonder why they have not included it in the constitution? Where they talk about freedom of speech – although nobody has anything to say – they should have mentioned that everybody is free to urinate anywhere he wants; everybody is free to shit anywhere he wants. Those would have been realistic considerations.
Freedom of speech in this country? – I have not seen a single person who can claim that he is a free thinker. They are learned, they are scholars, they can repeat scriptures, but free thinking? – that does not exist, has not existed since Gautam Buddha. He was the last free thinker in this country. For twenty-five centuries, nobody has bothered to think. In fact, nobody has time; raising children, creating more misery, more poverty, who has time to think?
I am certainly mad, because I am telling you to go beyond thinking, and you have not even started thinking! Here my work is first to make you start thinking…just to drop it. You cannot drop anything if you don’t have it. A beggar cannot say, “I have renounced the world.” The fact is just the opposite: the world has renounced him. Only an emperor can say, “I have renounced the world” – and it makes sense.
A few suggestions for you.

Two drunks were staggering along the railway tracks. “My God!” said the first. “I’ve never climbed so many steps in my whole life!”
“It’s not the steps that bother me,” replied the other. “It’s the low hand-rails.”

Just get a little drunk! This temple belongs to drunkards…and I will know before you know whether your heart is in synchronicity with me or not. You have come a long long way – just a few steps more.

The politician was trying to calm a group of angry farmers because he had not fulfilled any of his promises.
“If you put a bull into a field of cows one night,” he declared, “you would not expect to get a lot of new-born calves in the morning, would you?”
“No,” said a voice from the back of the hall, “but you would certainly expect to see a lot of contented faces.”

Just looking at you, I know how you are growing. Just the contented faces, just the silence surrounding you…just the depth of your eyes going deeper, becoming oceanic…just your gratitude to existence reaching to its peak. This is the language that I understand.
If somebody comes to me and says that he is absolutely in synchronicity with me – that won’t do, because that is not the language of synchronicity. Synchronicity speaks itself.
There is an ancient proverb, “Lies have to speak; truth remains silent.” But lies deceive you forever, and the silent truth can become your eternal treasure. It has not said anything.
In deep silence you all synchronize with me, because silence knows no distinctions. In laughing together you synchronize with me, because laughter knows no boundaries. In understanding what I am saying and where I am leading you, you synchronize with me.
Watches won’t do. In fact, you don’t want to synchronize with the watch; you want to synchronize with me. That happens as your meditation deepens, as your love becomes unconditional, without any expectations. Once it happens, it has happened forever.
And the synchronicity, the harmony with the master, does not think of contradictions, inconsistencies; those are all far below in the dark valleys. The moment you synchronize, you start rising towards the sunlit peaks, towards the stars.
It will happen…. The way I have been watching you, it is already happening. Don’t bother about watches – because what will you do if I don’t have a watch? In fact, the watch I have is not mine. Even if you synchronize with it, you will be synchronizing with somebody else, whose watch I am wearing. People give me watches to wear while they are here, just to bless their watches, so they can rejoice when they go that they are going with something, some heartbeats of me. This is difficult for the outside world to understand.
Gayan makes my clothes. She could have been paid highly anywhere; she is a perfect seamstress. Here she gets nothing except my love. She works day and night – but perhaps she has got the insight that there is nothing more valuable than the love of one who has arrived. His love will pull you also with invisible strings to the whole.
Everything I have does not belong to me. My shoes, Arpita goes on making; my hats Veena goes on making. They rejoice that I am wearing their hats, their shoes, their dresses. Somebody brings a car and is grateful that I am using the car for coming to Buddha Hall. I could have come walking – it is not such a great distance, just from one house to another house – but then I would not have made somebody happy without any effort.
It is difficult for the outsiders to understand me. They have never known such a thing – that anybody will give me their watches just to wear so that the watch starts vibrating with my heart, and then it becomes sacred to them.
One of the best television interviewers in America, Ted Koppel, asked me, “I cannot believe why people should go on giving you watches to wear, Rolls Royces to drive in. And not one but ninety-three Rolls Royces, and thousands of watches!”
I said, “You don’t know the ways of love.”
He said, “But I have friends….”
I said, “A friend is one thing – you don’t have a master. You have never loved somebody more than yourself. The moment you love somebody more than yourself, then you are ready to do anything.”
It does not matter whether it is valuable or not valuable…people from around the world go on sending me strange things, knowing perfectly well what I will do with them. Just the other day somebody sent a beautiful stone from Mount Sinai, where Moses met God, according to the theology of the Jews, so Mount Sinai has become a holy place.
I respect the idea, although the story may be false. The story may be just a story, but the person who sends a stone, packaged beautifully, has a tremendous love in his heart. What should he give to me? – everything is trivial. But this stone from Mount Sinai, which is the only place God has ever spoken to any man, is holy. Although it is just a stone, because it is holy, somebody sends it to me.
I go on receiving all kinds of things, and I will go on distributing them to others. What will I do with them? – I have come naked and I will go naked from the world. And I am still naked under my clothes, I know it!
I have been seeing you, watching you. Perhaps you need a few sutras: they bring you closer to me.
Seriousness separates; laughter brings closer.
…Never put off until tomorrow what you can enjoy today….
If you enjoy it today, you can enjoy it tomorrow too. Why postpone it? Postponement is a disease of the mind; it always goes on saying, “Tomorrow”…particularly for significant things. Any trivia and rubbish it will do today, the significant can be done tomorrow. But that tomorrow never comes: all that comes is always today. And if you have become accustomed to postponing for tomorrow, you have postponed your life completely.
…If you have two wives, that is bigamy; if you have many wives, that is polygamy; if you have one wife, that is monotony.
To avoid all these troubles, I don’t have a wife! Polygamy will drive you mad; bigamy is enough to destroy your whole life – and even monotony is powerful enough….
In my vision of a future humanity, there will not be polygamy, there will not be bigamy, there will not be monotony. Individuals will relate with each other, but will not create any relationship. They will remain free, independent individuals.
Now, Chamanlal is sitting before me – he is from Amritsar – and he loves me immensely. Very few people have loved me so deeply. I used to stay in Amritsar in his house. He is suffering from monotony: it has taken all his life and all his juice and all his joy. I have stayed in many, many houses all around the country, and it is always monotony.
One of my friends was rich enough…. I asked him, “What are you going to do with so much money? Whether you have nine crore rupees or ten crore rupees it won’t make any difference. With ten crore rupees you will not be happier than you are with nine crore rupees.”
He said, “That’s right.”
I said, “Now you are fifty. This is the time to turn towards the mountains.”
He was a courageous man; he stopped all his businesses, all his factories. When he met me next time, he said, “You have put me in such trouble.”
I said, “Trouble?…I was thinking you were troubled continuously – financing this, financing that, taking loans from the banks. I have put you out of all trouble.”
He said, “That’s okay – but now I am suffering from monotony. I have only one wife and for thirty years…just seeing each other is enough torture!”
I told him, “Take a beautiful bungalow in a hill station and move there.”
He said, “I can – but you will have to come with me. If you are there then I don’t care. But if my wife and I are there, we will kill each other.” They loved each other – it is not that they were not loving people. They loved each other, but I could understand his psychology.
Having nothing to do, he opened a dharmshala – a free house with two hundred bedrooms, for people who come to visit in his city to stay free of charge – just to create some work for himself and to avoid his wife the whole day. So early in the morning he would go out – and he was not earning anything…on the contrary he was losing, but he had enough to lose. He would return at ten or eleven in the night.
His wife told me, “You have stopped him from earning money. Now he is losing money, but still the same trouble; in the morning he goes, and in the night he comes back.”
I said, “It is not the factories, it is you. Do you really want him – be frank and sincere – to be twenty-four hours in the house?”
She said, “No. I have taken a vow not to lie: it is good for an hour or two that we meet, but twenty-four hours…then it becomes heavy. Then we start torturing each other, knowing perfectly well that it is useless.”
…Every small child wonders why his father did not go into the ice cream business….
…The great truth is that women actually like men, and men can never believe it.
Do you really believe your girlfriend likes you? When you see your face in the mirror, you cannot like yourself. Either the girl is an idiot, or…why should she like and love you?
But the reverse is also true: no woman believes that her lover really loves her. She thinks his desire is to possess, she thinks his one-pointed goal is to have a sexual object, available twenty-four hours. Prostitutes are costly, and you cannot depend on them. They are temporary – temporary structures; you need a permanent, guaranteed relationship with a woman who cannot deny you. The women always suspect they are being used…. I cannot say that they are wrong, neither can I say that the men are wrong.
Love can exist only after meditation, not before it.
That is a simple existential law. Before meditation – only lust, only sexuality. Before meditation you are an animal and not really a human being. With meditation a transformation comes: you become human, and out of your humanness, love flows.
And when the meditation reaches to the highest peak, the Everest of consciousness, then a new change happens. In science they say that a certain quantity brings a qualitative change. You boil water up to ninety-nine point nine degrees, and it will not start evaporating. It will evaporate only at one hundred degrees. Now, nobody can say why. This makes life mysterious.
At a certain height, meditation – when it becomes so easy for you to move into it that no thought hinders – becomes as easy as breathing. Then comes a transformation, a second transformation: you are enlightened.
And parallel to it, from sex through meditation you move to love. From enlightenment you will become love. It will not be a question of loving anybody; it will be simply a question of your presence. Your presence will be love.
The moment one man’s presence becomes love, he has fulfilled his destiny. There is nothing more beyond it. He has come to the beyond.

…Home is the only place where you can scratch where it itches.
…A diplomat is a man who can make his wife believe she would look fat in a mink coat.
…Women like strong, silent men because they think they are listening.
…Never look back – something might be gaining on you.
…I was twelve years old before I found out that “Shut Up” was not my real name.
…It always pays to smile in the morning, because later in the day you may not feel like it.
…Telling lies is a fault in a boy, an art in a lover, an accomplishment in a bachelor, and second nature in a married woman.
You need not worry. Although I may not be able to see all the faces who are around here, I can certainly feel their heartbeat, whether they are part of my silence or just spectators, or they have come here just out of curiosity, or they are government CID informers. I can feel at least the heartbeat.
There are police officers, and naturally, they are the most afraid people here: somebody may recognize them. They have changed their dress…but you cannot change your heart. I don’t care about your dress and about your uniform; my concern is with your inner being. That you cannot change, because you don’t know about it.

Osho,
From some book I remember this sentence: “For the pilgrim to reach his destiny, it's essential to move instantly, but without hurry. It is so urgent that he reaches his destiny, that there is no time to hurry.”
Could you please speak about if there is any urgency, and how that relates to waiting?
You have got caught into a verbiage; otherwise the message is very simple. And it should be simple to you, because that’s what I’m saying in many, many ways.
First…the situation is every moment urgent for the simple reason that you cannot rely on the next moment; whether it will come or not is not in your hands. So every moment we are living in urgency. If you want to do something, do it now and here, because how can you postpone it?
Secondly, you say, “From some book I remember this sentence: ‘For the pilgrim to reach his destiny, it is essential to move instantly…’” Certainly if you want to come to yourself you should not lose a single moment, because there is always a possibility that death may interfere. But you must have got into trouble because the sentence certainly comes from some great mystic…“but without hurry.”
Move instantly because it is urgent, but without hurry, because in hurry you are not together, in hurry you are always late, in hurry you forget the essentials, in hurry you need time. Just to be in a hurry you will require time – and there is no time. This moment is all and all, and the situation is urgent.
You have been born without your agreement, without a contract, even without your permission; that was not in your hands. You will die without any advance information, without fixing a date and time – that is not in your hands. Once dead you cannot complain; and not yet born you are nowhere. To whom should existence ask, “Do you want to be born or not?”
So what you have really got in your hands, solid and real, is only this moment, in which you can act intelligently or stupidly; in other words, in which you can act as a meditator or as a mediocre….
But the statement is really beautiful. You got into a puzzle because you cannot think what kind of madness this is. First you say it is urgent, and urgency creates hurry; then you deny that there should be hurry, but the question is so urgent that you should start instantly. You got puzzled into the words. I will tell you how one can get puzzled into beautiful words.

Two men met at a bar and struck up a conversation. After a while one of them said, “You think you have family problems? Listen to my situation. A few years ago I met a young widow with a grown-up daughter and we got married. Later, my father married my stepdaughter. That made my stepdaughter my stepmother, and my father became my stepson. Also, my wife became the mother-in-law of her father-in-law.
“Then the daughter of my wife, my stepmother, had a son. This boy was my half brother because he was my father’s son, but he was also the son of my wife’s daughter, which made him my wife’s grandson. That made me the grandfather of my half brother.
“This was nothing until my wife and I had a son. Now the sister of my son, my mother-in-law, is also my grandmother. This makes my father the brother-in-law of my child, whose stepsister is my father’s wife.
“I am my stepmother’s brother-in-law; my wife is her own child’s aunt, my son is my father’s nephew and I am my own grandfather. And you think you have family problems?”

Just don’t get caught into words!
The statement is very clear: the situation is urgent because you have no guarantee for the next second. You have to start instantly because you cannot postpone – the future is not insured – and yet you cannot be in a hurry because hurry takes time.
So silently, peacefully, without hurry, without any tension, without any anguish, move into yourself instantly. It is urgent. Unless meditation becomes urgent to you, it will never happen; you will die before it. Put meditation on your laundry list as the most important, urgent…number one.
But meditation in your life is just at the very end of your laundry list – and the laundry list goes on becoming bigger and bigger. And before you finish your laundry list, you are finished, so the time for meditation never comes.
So I take that statement, whoever has made it, as tremendously significant. Don’t try to understand the sentence; I have cut it into pieces clearly for you, so you are not confused.
There is no time for hurry, there is no time for worry; in a single moment what can you do? Only one thing: you can settle within yourself. That will be the great transformation of your being. And certainly it is the most urgent thing – which we have been trying to postpone as long as possible.

Osho,
How is it these days that the men all seem to be going crazy, yet the women just go on becoming more beautiful, more silent, more graceful?
Milarepa, it is so simple…that I am amazed that you have asked it. When men go crazy then anything is beautiful. The beauty does not depend on the woman, the silence, the grace; it depends on your craziness.
But still it has some significance to be understood. It does not matter if you ask something stupid or idiotic, still I will give you a significant answer.
You are asking, “How is it these days that the men all seem to be going crazy, yet the women just go on becoming more beautiful, more silent, more graceful?”
A few fundamentals our men and our women all have to understand: one is that man’s sexuality is positive, women’s sexuality is negative. Negative is not a condemnation, it is just indicating the nature of their sexuality. Man is the donor and woman is the receiver.
My own experience of old-style Hindu monks, Jaina monks, Buddhist monks, Catholic priests is that they don’t understand the nature of sexuality. They have a positive sexuality; they collect sperm and they don’t have much space for it. They go on eating, they go on nourishing their body, they go on exercising, they go on doing everything that creates more sperms – and the bag where the sperms collect has a very limited capacity. That’s why man can have only one orgasm at a time: just one shot, and his gun is empty!
But the woman has a negative sexuality. She can have multiple orgasms, because she is not losing anything in orgasm – except she is getting tired of all the huffing and puffing, and the ugly beast on top doing push-ups! That’s another thing, they get tired…they keep their eyes closed and they lie down almost like stone statues: “Let him do it, it is just a question of a few seconds. One can survive.”
Within a few seconds the man is finished, but those few seconds are aggressive. His sexuality is aggressive; that’s why if he cannot get a woman, he becomes crazy. What to do with his aggressive sex energy? It needs some outlet. That’s why he finds all kinds of perversions. Strange…he goes to a woman, to a prostitute, just pays her and loses his energy – a strange business!
One prostitute can have many customers in one night, because she does not lose energy; on the contrary, the more people are attracted towards her, she starts becoming more graceful, more beautiful. And on the other hand the man is in such a hurry to get rid of his energy, which is becoming a burden, that his eyes go blind. He starts looking at anything resembling a woman – and suddenly he has found a Cleopatra or a Sophia Loren. His eyes are not clean and clear. A great fog is surrounding him because his sexual energy is so aggressive. It is bound to happen.
And why is the man’s semen so overpowering? They have their own problems. In one sexual act a man releases nearabout one million living cells, and those one million living cells have a lifespan of only two hours. Once they are out of the body of the man, that is where politics is born: then one million cells are rushing, trampling over each other to reach to the woman’s cell. And the woman has only one cell….
The woman’s cell is non-aggressive; it can wait, there is no overburdening. Moreover the woman has every month a menstrual period in which that cell is released. Then for one month she is completely free from sexual desire. In one month another cell will come, another egg will come, so her situation is far more non-aggressive. You have not heard of any woman raping a man.
But man goes mad. He is going crazy because those cells want to get out. It is too crowded, they want a little open sky, a little air. Once they enter into the woman’s body, a great marathon race starts, because only one will be able to reach to the cell. The cell, the egg of the mother, is constituted in such a way that it is very loose and very available, but the moment one male cell enters it, it naturally closes, becomes hard. Now no other cell can enter into it.
The passage of the woman’s vagina to us seems to be very small, but to the poor male cell it is almost two miles long in proportion to his size. They have never traveled that much, so everybody is an amateur.
I have always wondered why the world is full of idiots and mediocres and fanatics, fundamentalists, fascists of all kinds and sorts – they come in all sizes. My understanding is that when the man’s cells start moving into the woman’s body, the wiser ones stand aside. The intelligent ones don’t want to mix with the crowd; only the boxers, football players, champions of all kinds of stupid games, wrestlers…they do their great job, rushing over each other. It is a question of life and death: if within two hours they don’t reach first, their life is finished, within two hours they will be dead.
Only once in a while it happens that two wrestlers of equal strength reach to the woman’s cell at the same time; that’s why twins are born. Sometimes even seven children have been given birth – I think nine is the record – but it is very rare that out of a million people, nine will reach exactly at the same time, not a single minute, a single second, a split second behind. Then they all enter into the woman’s egg.
The world is full of idiots and fools, bureaucrats, politicians, Don Quixotes and all kinds of stupids, competitors, competing in every field of life – it may be money, it may be power, it may be prestige, it may even be saintliness. It is expected…these are the people who have won the first race.
The intelligent ones, the poetic, the silent, who could have become a Gautam Buddha, who could have become a poet like Rabindranath or Kahlil Gibran…. We know – it is a simple fact – that intelligent people will not compete with this crowd, and the crowd is not small: one million….
Rabindranath was the thirteenth son of his father. We don’t know how many Rabindranaths we have lost, and how many Albert Einsteins are never born, and how many Picassos, van Goghs, Mozarts have never been able to make the race. There are things which only idiots can do. Have you ever seen any wise man participating in a marathon race? Have you ever seen any enlightened one being competitive, begging for votes so that he can become the president?
The wise people keep aloof.
The idiots rule.
And the idiots are in the majority.
I was thinking, Why are they in the majority? – but then I found that the first marathon race has created the whole trouble. And this situation will continue unless we are more intelligent and stop this accidental birth – what I call accidental birth.
Now we are at a stage where genetic engineering can manage very easily to give us as many Rabindranaths, as many Picassos, as many Bodhidharmas, as many Nijinskys as we want, on demand, because in those one million cells all kinds of people are there.
The point is we should drop the old idea that you have to produce your son yourself. Strange…you order your clothes from the best tailor, you purchase the best car, you make the most beautiful house – not with your own hands. You don’t insist that “I will make my car, I will make my house, I will make my clothes, I will make my food”…you will go insane. So why do we insist that the son should be ours? But just our old superstition continues.
According to me, each hospital, each medical college should have semen banks, just like blood banks. You can go and ask for what kind of child, boy or girl, what kind of face, what kind of color you want, how long a lifespan, what kind of intelligence – poetic, scientific, mystic…you can ask for it. They will have categories sorted out, and your wife will be injected with just a single sperm.
I don’t think there is anything wrong in it. You can go on making love, but you should use every birth control method. For birth you have to inquire to the medical authorities….
It will change the whole face of the earth. There will be so many intelligent people, creative people, loving people. It will raise the standard of life, it will raise the standard of health, it will bring about more inventions, more poetry, more sculpture, and it will make man no longer accidental, at the mercy of blind nature.
Then there is no need even to get married, because you will not be creating children of your own. The possibility is already accomplished that the child need not be raised in the mother’s womb; the child can be raised in a mechanical womb, far more scientifically. The best parents will be those who have chosen the best child, with the best qualities, with the best scientific womb, so when he comes out of the womb they can take him home.
This will do two things: the children will become so beautiful and so intelligent, so healthy, so long living, and also the parents will be unburdened.
Every parent is harassing the child to become great, to become Alexander the Great, to become Gautam Buddha. What can the child do? – it is not in the program of his basic cell. So parents are disturbed because children don’t listen to them, and children are unnecessarily harassed and hurt. They cannot forgive their parents their whole life for the way they have been treated in their helplessness, in their childhood.
What you are demanding of them they don’t have in their basic program. Every human psychology is completely programmed, his physiology is completely programmed, and everything goes according to the program. There are no accidents. You can have as beautiful women in the world as you like; you can have as strong men in the world as you like.
Now it is within our hands.
Who is preventing it? Your priests and your politicians – because they will be the ones who will lose all glamour. Far more intelligent people will be there, so these stupid politicians who know next to nothing…
I have seen education ministers who cannot even sign their names, and they are deciding the education for the whole country. I have seen finance ministers who don’t know the meaning of finance, who have not any idea how the economy runs. I have seen soldiers who don’t have any courage.
This whole society is upside down.
Milarepa, particularly amongst my people it is going to be this way. Man, unless he meditates, will go crazy – crazy after women. And man finds meditation more difficult than the woman. Experienced mothers who have given two, three births can be asked before the birth and can say whether there is a girl or a boy in their womb, because a girl remains silent, and a boy starts playing football. He starts kicking here and there.
In meditation girls can enter deeper. On the one hand they can go deeper in meditation; on the other hand their sexuality is negative, it is not a compulsion on them.
I was amazed in my experience moving amongst all kinds of monks and nuns, because no monk is really celibate, but nuns are celibate. They can manage to be celibate; they don’t have an aggressive sex, and moreover nature has provided that every month their sex energy goes out of their body automatically, they are clean again for one month. But man is in a difficulty. His sex energy can be subdued only by deeper meditation. Then he will not go crazy.
You have to understand another basic law: the woman looks more beautiful the more she runs away from you. She does not want to run away; she waits for you to come closer, and then she starts running again. She wants to be caught, but she is not going to take the initiative so that later on, after the honeymoon, when there will be continuous struggle, she can always say to you, “You were after me. I had never intended to marry you.”
After the honeymoon all beauty disappears, because your sexual energy has gone down the drain. Even the most beautiful woman will no longer look beautiful to you because you have used her. You know her whole geography, you know her whole topography; now there is nothing to explore. And man is by nature an explorer, a hunter, an adventurer.
You may not have perceived that all the great cities, all the beautiful houses, all the beautiful gardens are not to man’s credit; they are to be credited to woman. She never wanted to be a hunter, she never wanted to run continuously after animals, she never wanted to move. She wanted to live peacefully in a beautiful house surrounded with a beautiful garden.
But man basically is a nomad. That nomadness comes from his basic sexual cell. He is made of those sexual cells which keep telling him, “Go on, go on.” He will go to all kinds of strange places for no reason, just because he needs money…and once he has money he starts traveling. A home he does not have.
You will see it in tourists: ninety percent are Americans, because they have so much money that what to do?…Go on, anywhere. And when they go on to the Taj Mahal or to Khajuraho or to Ajanta or to Ellora, they cannot stay there. They cannot watch the beauty silently, look at the great art that has taken thousands of years to make, thousands of people were involved to make it; they will simply go on running, taking photographs. Back at home they will make a good album and then they will see how beautiful are the things they have seen. And they have not seen…they have only photographed! Those photographs could have been purchased from the market; there was no need to go around the world.
But man is a nomad. Woman is not.
In Hindi we have a word for the wife, gharwali, one who owns the home. But that word we cannot use for the man, who really owns it; nobody can say to any man, “You are gharwala.” He has paid, he has earned the money, but the woman is called the owner of the home.
But it is exactly right. Man may have earned, but the woman has made the house. Woman has forced man to live a life settled, silent, peaceful, not to go on running like stray dogs from one place to another.
In my people’s world, Milarepa, unless you are meditating deeply you will not be able to transcend your sexual craziness. And I can see – I have been continuously observing – women get into meditation quickly. It comes to them easily. The more meditative they become, they will become more beautiful, more serene, more calm, more quiet, more graceful.
But you, not doing meditation, not creating a state of no-mind, will fall a victim of jazz music or skinheads; you will do something stupid.

The doctor was explaining to Paddy how nature makes up for a person’s deficiencies.
“For example,” he told Paddy, “if a man is deaf, he may have very good eyesight, and if a man is blind, he may have a very good sense of smell.”
“I think I see what you mean,” said Paddy. “I have often noticed that if a man has one short leg, then the other one is always a little bit longer.”

Great thinkers, coming to great conclusions!

The student demonstration had turned into a riot. Suddenly a man staggered out of the crowd carrying a limp girl in his arms.
“Here,” shouted a cop running up to the man, “give her to me. I will get her out of this.”
“The hell with you,” replied the man, “go and find one of your own!”

Even in a riot, when people are being killed, shot, the man’s mind remains continuously thinking of sex.
Sex is man’s greatest bondage.
You have to make every effort for meditativeness, so that all your sexual energy, instead of moving downwards, starts moving upwards. Instead of finding a beautiful woman, start creating a beautiful man within you. Rather than finding a graceful woman, your energy can make you graceful.
But man is more stupid than woman. The whole of history has been made up by man, and you can see the madness: it is a history not of mankind, but of madness, wars, rape, burning living people, destruction. And now they have come to the peak; perhaps Ronald Reagan will be the last chapter of history – although there will be no one to read it, and perhaps no one will be able to write it even.

A married couple took their little boy to the circus. During the gorilla act the husband had to go to the bathroom, and while he was gone, the little boy nudged his mother and said, “What is that long thing hanging down between the gorilla’s legs?”
His mother was very embarrassed and said quickly, “Oh, that’s nothing, dear.”
When the husband returned, the wife went off to buy some popcorn, and while she was gone, the little boy nudged his father and said, “Daddy, what is that big thing hanging down between the gorilla’s legs?”
The father smiled and said, “That son, is his penis.”
The little boy looked puzzled for a moment and then said, “Then why did mummy just say it was nothing?”
“Son,” said his father proudly, “I have spoiled that woman.”