---
title: The New Alchemy 01
series: The New Alchemy 01-34
talk_number: 1
url: https://oshoworld.com/the-new-alchemy-01
language: English
duration: 00:17:03
author: WESTERN MYSTICS
scraped_at: 2026-01-03T09:31:01.222964+00:00
---
I have called you here; you heard my call, and you have come. But this coming, this outward coming, is not enough. Now, I will call you again, on a different journey: the inner one. And if you cooperate, if you are ready to move inward, that will also happen.
The most important thing to remember is that the inner journey requires deep courage. It is an adventure into the unknown. The sea is uncharted; it needs courage to take a plunge. What is this courage? – the courage is to leave your past and to take a jump.
If you are not courageous, you go on continuing with your past. You go on repeating the past again and again. You move in a wheel, in a circle. Then your whole life becomes just a repetition. Courage means the courage to come out of this vicious circle, to break the continuum – to be discontinuous with the past, to be new, to be reborn.
This meditation camp is going to be a happening for a rebirth. There will be much pain, much suffering, because every birth is a painful phenomenon. If you are ready then even that pain will become happiness, because when the morning is the darkest, when the night has become darkest, the sunrise is just nearby. When your suffering comes to a climax, you are just near the boundary from where the dimension of happiness and bliss starts. You will have to pass through suffering. Be ready for it because unless you pass through it you will never go beyond it. Don’t suppress suffering. Rather, move through it.
The meditation experiments that will be done here will bring your suffering to the surface. These experiments will bring your suffering from the unconscious to the conscious; and once suffering becomes conscious, it can evaporate.
From the unconscious, nothing evaporates. You go on pushing and forcing away your pain, anguish, anger, violence. You go on pushing and forcing everything inside you into the unconscious. Your unconscious has become a wound, it has become a hell. It has to be brought out. If you really want to enter a heavenly dimension, you will have to pass through the hell. Courage will be needed: courage to move through the hell, courage to be reborn.
When I say it is a rebirth, I mean it. You will pass through a death and then you will be reborn. Meditation is a death: dying to the past, dying completely as an ego.
What to do? How to die so that a new life is born unto you? How to die so that you can be resurrected again?
Jesus says that unless a seed dies it cannot become a tree, it cannot grow. You are like seeds, seeds of a divine flower, and unless you die as seeds the flowering will never happen. You have been carrying your seed for lives and lives, for millions and millions of years. Every moment is the right moment. If you are ready, the seed can die and a new life resurrect, a new life arise out of it.
If you have come, if you have heard my call, now be courageous. Don’t withhold yourself! Whatsoever I say, move into it as totally as possible. If you are ready to be courageous I can do much. Much is possible if you cooperate with me. If you just cooperate and become open, I can enter you. I can change you: I can make new adjustments, a tuning.
And once you are tuned, the whole of existence becomes different, because now you can listen to the cosmic harmony, the cosmic music. Once tuned to the infinite, you will never be the same again. If you are tuned for even a single moment, you will not be the same again.
Through all these experiments, my effort will be to tune you. But your cooperation will be needed. You can create barriers, you can create hindrances, you can resist me. If you resist, nothing will happen. Then you will say that nothing has happened – and you will be responsible, because that means you didn’t allow, you were not in a let-go.
Remember these words for this whole camp: let-go. Remember not only the words, but the feeling. Remain in a surrendered attitude, ready for whatsoever happens, and for whatsoever I do: allowing, vulnerable, open. Even if death occurs, be ready. Only then will life happen to you.
If you can trust me, only then is something possible. And trust always means… Ultimately it means that you are leaving everything in my hands. Even if death occurs, you will not complain. If your preparation is this much, then you will not return from this camp the same man. You will go back a new man, totally new. And the whole world becomes new when the insight into the infinite has happened.
Throughout this camp, feel a deep surrender. The first words to remember: let-go, surrender.
The second word to remember continuously is: now. N-O-W, now. Don’t move to the past, and don’t move to the future. Remain with the moment. Whenever you feel that your mind is going back again – thinking about the past, moving into memories – bring it back to the now. Or, if you feel your mind is moving, projecting into the future, bring it back to the now. If you are eating, then eat – don’t do anything else. If you are walking, then walk – don’t do anything else. If you are listening, then listen – don’t do anything else. If you are meditating, then meditate – don’t do anything else. Remain with the moment, here and now. It should be a constant effort. In the beginning you will feel it as a strain, just because of your old habits, but as you move deeply into it the strain will disappear. For the first time you will feel totally non-tense, because in the now no tension is possible. Just this moment is existential; everything else is either memory or projection. The past exists not, the future exists not – only the present.
The second thing to remember: remain with the now. Don’t go here and there, just remain with the present moment. It is difficult, but once you have the feeling of it, it becomes very easy, simple, natural.
And the third thing: in the techniques, in the meditation techniques bring your total energy. Halfhearted efforts won’t do. You will simply be wasting time and energy. A certain peak is needed, only then are you transformed into another dimension. Only after a peak… Just as when you heat water, at 100 degrees it evaporates. Even at 90 degrees it is just hot water, and if you leave it at that it will again cool down. The heat has been wasted; nothing has happened.
So bring your total energy to every technique that we are going to practice here. Only then will a certain degree be achieved, where you are no longer the old one. The old one will have disappeared, evaporated, and a new phenomenon will have come into being. So don’t withhold, don’t divide. Move totally. Bring your whole mind and body into it; don’t leave anything behind. And then I promise you that you will not leave here as you came. You will be a new man, resurrected. The unknown will have happened to you. It is certain, it is scientific – but you have to fulfill the conditions.
Tomorrow morning we will start the first meditation technique. It will be of four stages…
The first ten minutes: fast, chaotic breathing – forgetting yourself completely, as if you have become just the breathing process.
Second: for ten minutes, catharsis, acting out your emotions. Whatsoever is hidden and suppressed has to be brought out, thrown out – screaming, weeping, crying. Whatsoever happens, allow it to come out, help it to come out. Act it out completely, it is an unburdening.
In the third ten-minute step we will be using a mantra, hoo. You have to use this mantra hoo as forcibly, as strongly, for as long as possible. This is going to hammer your inner energy.
The energy lies just near the sex center. This hoo penetrates to the very sex center, hammers the energy, and the energy starts moving upward; when it starts moving upward it is called kundalini. When the energy moves downward it becomes sexual. The same energy, when it moves upward, becomes spiritual. The energy is the same, only the dimension is different.
After these three steps the fourth will be of total silence.

============================================================

Three sutras, basic for life transformation, are ultimate in a way. The first: be non-ambitious.
Kill out ambition.
Totally. Unless ambition is killed you will remain in misery. Ambition is the source of all misery.
What is ambition? A wants to be B, the poor wants to be rich, the ugly wants to be beautiful. Everyone longs to be something, someone else, something other than what he is. No one is content with himself. That’s what ambition is.
Whatsoever you are, you are not content with it. That is ambition. Then you are bound to be in misery, because you cannot be anything else. You can only be yourself, nothing else is possible. All else is just futile, harmful, dangerous. You can waste your life, your existence.
Whatsoever you are, you are. Accept it, don’t desire otherwise. This is what non-ambition means. Non-ambitiousness is basic to all spiritual transformation, because once you accept yourself many things start happening.
The first thing… If you accept yourself totally, the first thing that happens to you is a non-tense life. There is no tension. You don’t want to be anything else, there is nowhere to go. Then, you can be here and now. Then, there is no comparison. Then, you are unique, yourself. Then, you are not thinking in terms of others.
Then, there is no future. Ambition needs future, ambition needs space to grow. Ambition cannot grow here and now, there is no space. The moment is so small, so atomic. Ambition needs the future; and the greater the ambition, the greater the future that is needed.
If your ambition is such that it cannot be fulfilled in this life, then you will create an afterlife. You will create heaven, you will create moksha, you will create the concept of rebirth. I am not saying that there is no rebirth. I am saying that you believe in rebirth, not because it is there – you believe in it because your ambitions are so great that they cannot be fulfilled in one lifetime. Your belief in rebirth, reincarnation, is not because it is a fact. It is because of ambition and desire. Reincarnation may be a fact, but for you it is just a fiction. For you it is just more future, more space to move in.
Remember, you cannot be ambitious in the present moment. Impossible! There is no space. The present moment is so atomic, so small, that you cannot move in it. You can be in it, but you cannot desire in it. It is long enough to be, but it is not long enough for desiring. To desire, you need future, time. Really, time exists because of desire.
For the trees here, there is no time. For the birds singing here, there is no time. For the stars and for the sun and for the earth, there is no time. Time exists because of human desire. If humanity was not on this earth there would be no time: there would be no past and no future.
So don’t think that the past, the future and the present are parts of time; they are not. The past and the future are parts of a desiring mind. Time consists only of the present, the herenow. Time consists only of eternal moments, the eternal moment. Your desire creates the future. Your memory creates the past. They are parts of your mind. Don’t desire, and the future disappears. And when there is no future, how can you be tense? How?
There is no possibility of being tense if there is no future. And if there is no past – if you know that it is simply memory, the dust collected on the way – how can there be any anxiety? With the past, anxiety enters. With the future, plans, imagination, projections, tensions exist. With the past dropped, the future not opened, you are here, now. No anxiety, no tension, no anguish.
Non-ambition means accepting yourself as you are. That doesn’t mean that there is no possibility of growth. No, on the contrary, when you accept yourself as you are, the transformation sets in. You start growing, but the dimension differs. Then the dimension is not in the future, the dimension is in the eternal.
Know well this distinction. You can move in two ways: if you move into the future, you are moving into the mind – a fiction, a dream world. If you don’t move into the future, then a different dimension becomes open for you. From this very moment you are moving into the eternal.
The eternal is hidden in the moment.
If you can be here right now, in the moment, you have entered the eternal. If you go on thinking of the future and the past, you are moving in the temporal. The temporal is the world, and the eternal is nirvana.
Buddha is reported to have said again and again that if you can be in the now, there is no need of any technique to meditate. It is enough. It will do all that is needed. But how can you be in the now if you are ambitious?
The ambitious mind cannot be in the now. It can be anywhere else, but it cannot be in the now. The ambitious mind always moves away from the present. It is thinking of that which is to come, it is thinking of tomorrow. It is thinking of an afterlife, it is not interested in the life that is here. It is interested in something that should be. It is not interested in the is; it is always interested in the ought, in the should. That interest is non-religious. A religious mind, a religious consciousness, is interested in existence as it is. The first sutra is: Kill out ambition totally, so that you can be here and now, so that you can enter the eternal.
The second sutra:
Kill out desire of life.
Kill out desire of life. Life’s laws are very paradoxical. If you desire life, you will miss it. That is the surest way to miss it. If you desire life, you will miss it; if you don’t desire it, abundant life will happen to you.
Through desire you move against life. It looks paradoxical. It is. But this paradoxical law has to be understood deeply. Why, when you desire life, do you miss it? It should not be so. Logically, mathematically, it should not be so. If someone desires life, why should he miss it? The mechanism is such that when you desire, you have again moved into the future – and life is here! Life is already the case, how can you desire it? Only that which is not, can be desired. And life is. How can you desire it? It already is, it has happened already. You are life. So if you desire it, you will miss it. Through desire, you are moving away. Every desire leads you further and further away. That’s why there is so much insistence on desirelessness. Not that Buddha or all those who talk about desirelessness are against life; really, on the contrary, they are for life. But they say “Don’t desire,” and to us it looks as if they are against life, life-negative. They are not.
We are missing life through desire. They say “Don’t desire.” Then what happens if you don’t desire? What will happen? Life will happen to you. It is already happening, but you cannot look at it – your eyes are fixed on the future. You are somewhere else, your mind is not here. Life is here and you are not here, so the meeting has become impossible. Life will always be here and you will never be here; then there will be no meeting. Then you will hanker for life, you will desire life – and you will go on missing it.
Allow life to happen to your consciousness. What can be done? – be attentive, here. Don’t be somewhere else.
The moment you start desiring life, you become afraid of death – it is bound to be, because the desire for life creates the fear of death. There is no death. In reality, nothing dies: nothing can. It is impossible. Death never happens, death is not. Then why do we feel death so much, and why are we so afraid of death, which is not? – because of the desire for life. The desire for life creates a counter fear: the fear of death. We don’t know life, but we desire life. Then the fear comes that life is going to be destroyed.
We see death happening… Someone dies – have you ever observed the fact that it is always someone else who dies, never you? It is always someone else who dies. You see death from outside, you have not seen it from inside. You just see someone dying, you don’t know what is happening to him in his innermost core. You just know what is happening on the periphery. The periphery has died: it is no longer alive, the man cannot breathe. But what has happened in the core, in the very being, in the center? You don’t know.
No one has witnessed death. And no one can, because there is only one way to witness it: if you move to your own innermost core and witness it there. But death never happens there. That is why a Buddha laughs at death, a Krishna laughs.
Krishna says to Arjuna in the Gita, “Don’t be afraid. Don’t think that someone is going to die. No one dies; you cannot kill anyone. It is impossible.” In this world, nothing can be destroyed. Existence is eternal. Nothing can be destroyed, not even matter can be destroyed. Destruction is not possible, only change is possible.
Life goes on moving. One wave dies, appears to die, and arises as another wave. Only forms disappear and new forms appear, but nothing dies and nothing is born.
If nothing dies then nothing is born, because death is possible only if something is born. Birth and death are two fallacies. You existed before your birth, otherwise birth would not have been possible. You will exist after your death, otherwise it would not be possible for you to be here and now. But the desire to cling to life creates the fear – the fear of death.
If you drop the desire for life, immediately the fear of death disappears. And when the fear of death disappears, you can know what life is. A mind trembling in fear, in anguish, cannot know. Knowing needs a very calm, unafraid, fearless consciousness. Desire for life means fear of death.
The sutra says: Kill out desire of life, so that the fear of death disappears. And when there is no death, and no clinging to life, you will know what life is, because life has already happened to you. You are it! It is not something extrinsic, it is something intrinsic. It is happening already. You are breathing in it. You are just like a fish in the ocean of life, but not aware of it because your attention is obsessed with the future. Desire means obsession with the future. No desire means living here and now.
And the third sutra:
Kill out desire of comfort.
Desire for happiness – kill it out. It appears very gloomy, sad, life-negative. It is not. The more you desire comfort, the more discomfort will be felt. The more you desire comfort, the more discomfort you are creating for yourself because discomfort is relative to the desire for comfort.
The more you ask for happiness, the more you will be in suffering. The suffering is a shadow. The greater the desire for happiness, the greater will be the shadow. Ask for happiness and you will never get it. You will suffer frustration. Why? – because there is only one way to be happy, and that is to be happy here.
Happiness is not a result, happiness is a way of life.
Happiness is not the end result of desire. Happiness is an attitude, not a desire. You can be happy here if you know how to be, and you will never be happy if you don’t know how to be and you go on desiring it. Happiness is an art. It is a way of life. If you can be silent and aware of the life that is around you and within you this very moment, you will be happy. The birds are singing, the wind is blowing… The trees are happy, the sky is happy; everything in existence is happy except you.
Existence is happiness. It is an eternal celebration, a festivity.
Look at existence! Every tree is in a festive mood, every bird is in a festive mood. Except man, everything is in a festive mood. The whole of existence is a festival, a constant, continuous festival. No sadness, no death, no misery exists anywhere, except in the human mind. Something is wrong with the mind, not with existence. Something is wrong with you, not with the situation.
Why is man unhappy? No animal is so unhappy, no bird is so unhappy, no fish is as unhappy as man. Why is man so unhappy? – because man desires happiness, and the birds are happy right now, the trees are happy right now. Man desires happiness – he is never happy here and now. He always desires it, and goes on missing it, because happiness is here. It is happening all around you. Allow it to enter within. Be part of existence. Don’t move into the future. Existence never moves into the future, only the mind does.
This is what I call meditation: be here, don’t move into the future. Be non-ambitious, kill all desire for life, don’t desire happiness. And then you will be happy, and no one can destroy your happiness. Then it becomes impossible for you to be unhappy. Then you will be deathless and eternal life will have happened to you. It has already happened but you are not aware of it. Then you will be fulfilled. Non-ambitious, you will be fulfilled.
You are unique. Everything, every peak experience that is possible to anyone, is possible to you also – but it will happen only in a unique way.
It has happened to a Buddha, to a Jesus, to a Zarathustra, it will happen to you also. But it never happens in the same way. It is not going to happen to you like it happened to a Buddha. It is not going to happen to you like it happened to a Jesus. It will happen in a unique, individual way to you. It will happen to you. It will be absolutely new. The innermost core of the experience will be the same – the same bliss, the same silence, the same enlightenment – but on the periphery everything will be different.
So don’t imitate anyone. That is part of ambition. Don’t imitate Jesus, don’t imitate Buddha. Try to be yourself. Rather, even trying is futile. Just be yourself. When you are yourself, you are open to all possibilities. When you are yourself, the whole existence starts helping you. You are not fighting it.
When you are not fighting… This is what trust means. When you are not fighting, existence will happen to you. If you are fighting with it you are simply destroying yourself: your possibilities, energy, life, your existence.
Don’t fight! Surrender to existence.
Accept yourself as the whole wishes you to be. Don’t try to be anything else, and enlightenment can happen any moment. It can happen this very moment. There is no need to wait. But these three basic sutras are to be remembered.
Now we will start our morning meditation.

============================================================

The fifth sutra:
Kill out desire for sensation.

Learn from sensation and observe it, because only so can you commence the science of self-knowledge, and plant your foot on the first step of the ladder.
Kill out desire for sensation. We live for sensations, we hanker for sensations. We go on seeking newer and newer sensations; our whole life is an effort to get new sensations. But what happens? The more you seek sensations, the less sensitive you become. Sensitivity is lost.
It looks paradoxical. In sensations, sensitivity is lost because then you ask for more sensations and the “more” kills your sensitivity more. Then you ask for even more, and a moment comes when all your senses become just dull and dead.
Man has never been so dull and dead as he is today. Before, he was more alive, because there was no possibility to fulfill so many sensations. Now, science, progress, civilization, education have created so many opportunities to go on moving further and further into the world of sensation. Ultimately, you come out a dead person; your sensitivity is lost. Taste more foods – stronger tastes, stronger foods – and your taste will be lost. Look at many things – go on looking at more and more beautiful things, move around the world – and you will become blind. The sensitivity of your eyes will be lost.
Change your love object every day – your girlfriend or boyfriend, your wife or husband – change them every day, and your sensitivity to love will die. You are moving into dangerous terrain. You will never move in depth; you will only be moving on the surface, the periphery. And the more you experience things, the less your capacity to experience becomes. Then in the end, when everything has gone dead around you, you ask for the divine. You ask for bliss, you ask for truth. A dead man cannot experience the divine.
To experience the divine you need total sensitivity. You need aliveness.
Remember, only the similar can meet the similar. If you want the divine – and the divine means the most alive, the ever-alive, the ever-young, the ever-green… If you want to meet the divine, you will have to be more alive. So what to do? Kill out… all …desire for sensation. Don’t seek sensation, seek sensitivity. Become more sensitive.
The two are different. If you ask for sensations, you will ask for things, you will accumulate things. If you ask for sensitivity, then all the work has to be done on your senses, not on things. You are not to accumulate things. Now, you have to deepen your feelings, your heart, your eyes, your ears, your nose – every sense should be deepened in such a way that it becomes capable of feeling the subtle.
We cannot even feel the gross, and we must become capable of feeling the subtle. The world appears to be gross only because we cannot feel the subtle. Everywhere in the visible, the invisible is hidden.
Look at these trees. You look at the gross, the body of the tree. You never see, you never feel the life within, the growth. The tree is not growing, the tree is just a body. Something else – the invisible – is growing in it. And because of it, the tree grows. The inner is growing and, because of it, the outer grows. But you look only at the tree and only the outer is seen.
Look around you. Look into your friend’s eyes. You only look at the eyes, not at the one who sees through them. Touch your friend’s body. You touch only the gross, you never feel the subtle within. Only the body, the material, is felt because your eyes, your senses, have become so dull that they cannot feel the inner, the invisible.
More sensitivity is needed. Ask for fewer sensations and grow in sensitivity.
When you touch, become the touch. When you see, become the eyes. When you hear, your whole consciousness must come to the ears. Listening to a song or listening to the birds, become the ears. Forget your whole existence, as if you are only the ears. Come to the ears with your total being. Then your ears will become more sensitive.
When you are looking at something – at a flower, at a beautiful face or the stars – become the eyes. Forget everything else, as if the whole of your body has gone out of existence and your consciousness has become just eyes. Then your eyes will be able to look more deeply, and you will become capable of also looking at the invisible. The invisible can also be seen, but you need more penetrating eyes to see it.
Kill out… all …desire for sensation, and grow in sensitivity: fewer things – and more sensitivity. Think less of the world, think more of your senses. Purify them, and they are purified. When you don’t ask for sensations they become purified. When you ask for more and more sensations, you are killing your senses.
The man who finds the divine is the man whose senses are totally alive to their maximum capacity. Then, I say, it is not only that you can see the divine: you can taste the divine, you can smell the divine. From all the senses the divine can enter you. Only when the divine enters you from all the senses, only then – the realization. If you can only see the divine, it is just a partial realization. Then you are not really enlightened, only partially enlightened. If you cannot touch the divine, if you cannot taste it…
To use such words looks illogical. To taste God? You will think, “Is he a food?” Yes, he is everything! You can taste him, but then you need a very subtle capacity to taste. Then your very food will become divine. Through food, the divine will be felt. The Upanishadic rishis have said that food is Brahma: “Anna is Brahma.” They must have tasted him, they must have eaten him.
But we think that God is a logical problem, so we go on arguing about and about, for or against. We go on arguing whether God exists or not. This is irrelevant! God is not a question of argument, of logic, of reasoning; God is really a question of sensitivity.
If you don’t feel him, become more sensitive. No logical thinking will be of any help. Become more sensitive. If you are sensitive, he is here. He has always been here, but you are not sensitive. Things dull you, sensations dull you. Kill out desire for sensation.
The sixth sutra:
Kill out the hunger for growth.
This sutra is very revolutionary, very dangerous.
Kill out the hunger for growth. It looks absurd, because if we kill all hunger for growth then what is the need to grow into the divine? Then how can one grow into the divine, how can one reach the truth, and how can one become enlightened? Then why this meditation and all this fuss? We will have to go deeply into this sutra.
Kill out the hunger for growth. There are two types of growth: one which you can do something about, and the other which you cannot do anything about. For one your effort is needed and for the other your effortlessness is needed.
Spiritual growth is of the second type. Your effort will be of no help, it will only create barriers. You cannot do anything about it. You can do only one thing, and that is surrender. That means non-doing. You can do only one thing: allow existence to work within you. You can simply cooperate, that’s all. You can simply float – your swimming is not needed – a deep let-go. This is what is meant by: Kill out the hunger for growth.
Grow as the flower grows, unconsciously, but eagerly anxious to open its soul to the air. So must you press forward to open your soul to the eternal.
But it must be the eternal!
But it must be the eternal that draws forth your strength and beauty, not desire of growth. For in the one case you develop in the luxuriance of purity; in the other you harden by the forcible passion for personal stature.
I will repeat: But it must be the eternal that draws forth your strength and beauty, not desire of growth – because every desire is a hindrance, even the desire to reach the divine. Every desire is slavery, even the desire to be liberated. Desire, as such, is the problem, so you cannot desire the divine. That is contradictory. You can only desire the world; you cannot desire the divine because desire is the world, desire is sansar. You cannot desire moksha: when you are in a state of no desire, moksha happens to you. When you are in a state of desirelessness, liberation happens to you, the divine happens to you.
Allow the divine to bring forth all that is hidden in you.
Don’t seek growth. Surrender so that growth happens. Growth will happen, but this growth is not going to be through your effort but through the grace of existence. It is going to be through it. There are reasons for it…
Whatsoever you do will never be greater than you. It cannot be. Whatsoever you do will be lower than you. The doer is always greater than the deed, otherwise is not possible. The painter is greater than his painting, and the meditator is greater than his meditation.
Whatsoever you do will be lower than you, so how can you reach the divine? The divine is not lower than you, so through your own efforts you cannot reach it. If there was any possibility that through your own effort you could reach God, that God would be lower than you; he could not be higher than you. That God would be just a commodity – something in your hand, something that you have achieved. So remember, godliness cannot be achieved through your efforts. Godliness can happen to you, but not be achieved.
Then what is to be done? What can you do on your part? On your part you have to make a negative effort. That negative effort is: don’t create barriers, don’t create hindrances. Remain open. Remain open and waiting and ready to move, ready to grow. If the magnet starts working, allow the magnet to work.
Then what is the meditation I am emphasizing so much? It is just to destroy your barriers, it is a negative effort. Through meditation you will not reach the divine, but through meditation you will become available for the divine to work. Through meditation you will become open; through meditation your prayerfulness will reach to it, indicating that now you are ready, that now you will be cooperative.
That’s all that is needed on your part: allowing, let-go, surrender. Through will, nothing can be done. In the dimension of the divine, nothing can be done through will, only through surrender. But then, everything happens.
Through these meditations we are just breaking barriers. That’s why I emphasize to be like children. Go back – be like children. Forget your civilization, your culture, your manners, your postures, your personalities, your faces; all that is a facade. Throw it off! Become like small children.
But it will look like madness. Through your mind, going back to your childhood will look like madness. So be mad! But whatsoever the cost, be like children again.
Jesus says, “Only those who are like children will enter the kingdom of my God.” I also say the same. Move back to the point where civilization started to corrupt you, to the point where education started to corrupt you, to the point where society entered. Move to the point where you were unsocial or pre-social, when there was no society forced on you; you were innocent and pure. Move to that point. Unless you move back to that point again, barriers will remain.
Become children again. In the process you will feel madness, because you are throwing out all your adult values: education culture, religion, scriptures, manners. You are throwing out everything. You are moving back to the point where you were yourself, no society had yet corrupted you.
The whole process will look like madness. It is not. It is a catharsis, and if you can go through it, you will come out saner, less mad. The madness will be thrown out. You will become more pure, more sane.
Now, be ready for the meditation.

============================================================

The seventh sutra:
Desire only that which is within you.
It looks absurd, paradoxical, illogical: Desire only that which is within you. Desire is basically for that which is not within you. Desire means the desire for something that is not within you. If it is already within you, what is the need to desire it?
We never desire ourselves, we always desire something else. No one desires himself, there is no need. You are already that, you are not missing anything. We desire something which is missing.
This sutra says: Desire only that which is within you, for many reasons. One, if you desire something that is not within you, you may get it but it will never become yours. It cannot. You can never really become the master of it; on the contrary, you will become a slave. So whatsoever you desire in the outside world, if you get it you will not be the master of it, you will become just the slave. The possessor is always possessed by his possessions.
You may think that you own your house. That is not true: the house owns you. Things become masters because you cannot live without them. They can live without you, so they are the masters. You cannot live without them so you are not the master. The master is that which can live without the other; the slave is one who cannot live, who has become dependent. The greater the number of possessions, the greater is the slavery that is created.
You are possessed by your possessions, and you desired mastery! Frustration sets in because all your hope is frustrated. You come to a point where the things you wanted are there, whatever you desired has happened, but you have become the slave. The kingdom now appears to be nothing but an imprisonment and whatever you possess – or think that you possess – is not really possessed, because it can be taken away at any moment. Even if no one takes it away, death is bound to take it.
In religious terminology, that which can be taken away by death is not yours. Death is the criterion. If you have something, there is only one criterion to judge whether you really possess it: judge it against death and think whether you will be capable of having it after your death. If death takes it, you never possessed it. You were just in an illusion.
Is there something that death cannot take from you? If there is nothing, then religion is pointless, meaningless. But there is something that death cannot take over, and that something is hidden within you: you already possess it. It is your innermost nature. It has come with you, you are born with it. Or rather, it will be better to say, you are it. Not that you possess it, because if you possess it, it can be taken away.
You are it. It is your very being. It is your very ground, it is your existence. That is what is called atma. Atma means that which you are already. No one can take it away from you, not even death can destroy it.
This sutra says: Desire only that which is within you. Desire atma, desire your innermost self, desire the center, which you already possess but have forgotten completely.
Why does man forget? It is just part of a necessity: to survive, attention has to be paid to the outside world. To survive, to exist, to remain in life, you have to continuously pay attention to things: to food, to shelter. The body needs attention. The body becomes ill, the body is prone to suffering. The body is continuously in a struggle to survive, because for the body there is death and a continuous struggle with death. So you have to pay attention to it. The body is always in a state of emergency because at any moment death can occur. You have to be continually aware and conscious of this fight – this fight against death – so your whole attention moves outward. No energy is left to move within. This is a survival necessity. That’s why we go on forgetting that a center exists within us that is deathless, a center exists within us that is eternal, a center exists within us that is absolute bliss.
Pain attracts attention, suffering attracts attention. If you have a headache, your attention moves to the head – then you become aware that you have a head. If there is no pain, no ache in the head, you forget about it. You become headless, as if you have no head.
To me, the body is felt only when it is ill. If your body is absolutely healthy you will not feel it; you will become weightless. Really, you will become bodiless. This is the only criterion of authentic health: that the body is not felt at all. Wherever the body is felt it means that there is an illness, a disturbance, and your attention is called.
There are so many problems outside that your attention is constantly engaged and occupied there. That’s why you forget that something exists just in the very center of your being that is deathless, that is divine, that is blissful.
This sutra says:
Desire only that which is within you.

For within you is the light of the world – the only light that can be shed upon the path. If you are unable to perceive it within you, it is useless to look for it elsewhere.
The eighth sutra:
Desire only that which is beyond you.
Desire only that which is beyond you. Always desire the impossible, because only through that desire do you grow. And what is impossible? Climbing Mt. Everest is not impossible, neither is going to the moon. Both have become possible – someone has reached Everest. Even when no one had reached there, it was not impossible; difficult, but not impossible. It was within human capacity to reach. The moon is within our capacity to reach and man will also reach other planets. That is not impossible, only difficult, but it will become possible. Only one thing is impossible, one thing is beyond you, and that is your innermost self.
Why? I say that the moon is not so difficult to reach – and the moon is so far away – and I say that your innermost self is more impossible to reach, and it is just within you. Why is it, then, so difficult to reach? Because it is within you, that’s why. You only know how to reach what is without. Your hands can reach for that which is without, your eyes can see what is without. Your senses open to the outside, you have no senses for within. Your mind is a movement without, your mind cannot move within. That’s why the mind has to be thrown out. Only then can you enter meditation.
The mind is basically a movement toward the without. You can observe this very easily: whenever you think, you are thinking of something that is outside of you. Whatsoever you think, it is always something outside you. Have you ever thought about anything that is within? There is no need to because you can experience that which is within. There is no need to think about it; thinking is a substitute.
Thinking is a substitute. You can realize that which is within you, just around the corner, if you move your head, you change your direction. From without, you turn within. You can experience it – what is the need to think about it?
But we go on thinking even about the within. We think about what atma is. We think “What is this self?” and we create philosophies and systems. We go on creating theories that the self means “this,” the definition is “this,” and no one tries to feel it. It is so near to you, what is the need of theories?
Theories are needed for the far away because you cannot reach it right now – you have to create a bridge. Theories are needed to reach the moon, theories are not needed to reach the center within you, because there is no gap. There is nothing to be bridged, you are already there. Just a change of attitude and you realize it. Your attention turns and you realize it. There is no need of theorizing, of philosophizing. But we go on creating philosophies. We have created thousands and thousands of philosophies, and philosophers go on wasting their lives thinking about that which was already just within them. They could have jumped within at any moment!
But it is beyond – beyond the senses, because the senses cannot open toward it, they open in the opposite direction. Beyond the mind, because the mind cannot lead you there, it always leads you somewhere else. The mind is an instrument for the world; the mind is a mechanism to move without, to move away from you. It is meant for that. That’s why there is so much emphasis that in samadhi there is no mind. Samadhi is a state of no-mind, the mind ceases.
In our meditation techniques, our effort is this: how to cease to be a mind, how to drop the mind, how to drop thinking; how to come to a moment where no thinking exists, and simple attention exists, simple awareness, exists. “No thinking,” means no clouds in the sky, just the sky. “No thinking,” means no clouds of the mind, just consciousness. In that consciousness, you are within.
In the mind, you are without; in no-mind you are within. This transfer from mind to no-mind is the whole journey.
The transfer from mind to no-mind is the whole journey.
If you can add “no” to your mind, you have reached. That’s why it is called beyond.
Desire only that which is beyond you – beyond your senses, beyond your mind, beyond your ego. “You” will not be there. Your innermost center is not you; you are just the periphery. The periphery cannot be at the center. When you move toward the center you leave the periphery. The periphery cannot exist at the center. It belongs to the center but it exists outside the center, just around it.
Whatsoever you know about yourself is just the periphery: your name, your identity, your image. You are a Hindu or a Mohammedan or a Christian; you are black or you are white; you are this and that. Your nation, race, culture, is all just on the periphery, all your conditionings are just on the periphery.
The world cannot enter your center. It can only cultivate the periphery, it can only touch you on your boundaries. Only your boundary can be Hindu, only your boundary can be Christian, only your boundary can be Jaina. You are not, you cannot be.
Only your boundary belongs to India or to Pakistan or to America. You cannot belong to any nation, to any race. You belong to existence itself. All divisions are false at the center, but they are meaningful on the periphery.
So, whatsoever you know about yourself is your ego. Ego is just a utilitarian word. Your whole periphery means you, and this you will drop when you start moving inward.
This you will drop by and by; this you will disappear; this you will evaporate. Then a point will come when you are authentically yourself; your old self is no longer there. That’s why it is said: Desire only that which is beyond you. It is beyond you because when you reach it you have lost yourself.
The ninth sutra:
Desire only that which is unattainable.
Desire only that which is unattainable. What is unattainable? Look around – everything is attainable. You may not have attained it, but it is attainable. If you make an effort you can attain it. Potentially, it is attainable.
Alexander created a big empire… You may not have created one, but what Alexander can do, you can do. It is not impossible, it is not unattainable. You may not have gathered as many riches as a Rockefeller or someone else, but what Rockefeller can do, you can do. It is human, it is within your capacity. You may even be a failure, you may not be able to attain it, but it was attainable. Your failure is your own failure, but potentially you could have been a success, so it cannot be said that the thing was unattainable.
What then is unattainable? That which cannot be attained? If that is the meaning, then what is the point of desiring it? If it cannot be attained, then the desire is futile. Why desire that which is unattainable? What is meant by it?
The meaning is very deep, esoteric. The meaning is that your innermost self is unattainable because it is already attained. You cannot attain it because you are it. You cannot make it an achievement. It is not something that has to be attained. It is already there, you have never been away from it. You have never lost it; it is your very nature. It is you, your innermost being. You cannot achieve it, you can only discover it. You cannot attain it; you can only uncover it, you can only recognize it.
There is no possibility of inventing it, it is already there. It is not to be earned, it is already there. You just have to give your awareness to it. You have to focus your awareness on it and, suddenly, the unattainable is attained. Suddenly, that which was never lost is found.

When Buddha attained enlightenment someone asked him, “What have you attained?”
Buddha said, “Nothing, because whatsoever I have attained, now I know that it was always there. It was never lost, so I have simply discovered it. I have known some treasure which was, already, always within me.”
Desire only that which is unattainable.

It is unattainable, because it forever recedes. You will enter the light, but you will never touch the flame.
It is unattainable in another sense, also. You will never be able to say “I have attained it,” because who will say that I have attained it? That “I” which can claim, is no longer. That ego – the periphery – is no longer. In attaining, in discovering, it has to be lost. The ego has to be thrown away, cast away. You can reach only when you have become egoless. You cannot reach with the ego, because the ego itself is the barrier.
So who is there who will make the claim? It is said in the Upanishads that if someone claims that he has attained, know well that he has not attained, because the very claim is egoistic. If someone says “I have known God,” know well that he has not known God because once God is known, who is there to claim it? The knower is lost in the very phenomenon of knowing. Knowing happens only when the knower is not. When the knower is absent, the knowing happens – so who will claim it?

There was a Zen monk, Nan-in. Someone asked him, “Have you known the truth?” He laughed, but kept silent.
The man said, “I cannot understand your mysterious laughter. Nor can I understand your mysterious silence. Use words. Tell me! And be clear – tell me yes or no. Have you known the truth, the divine?”
Nan-in said, “You are making it difficult for me. If I say yes, the scriptures say that one who says ‘I have known,’ has not known. So if I say yes, it means no. And if I say no, it will not be true. So what am I supposed to do? Don’t force me to use words. I will laugh again and keep silent. If you can understand, it is okay. If you cannot understand, it is also okay. I will not use words. Don’t force me to, because if I say yes it means that I have not known, and if I say no it will not be true.”

You will reach, but in your purity. In that purity, your ego will not be there. The ego is the impure, foreign element within you – just the dust gathered all around you. It is not you. Naked, you will reach. Your ego is just like your clothes, it will not be there.
Desire only that which is unattainable.
Now get ready for our meditation.

============================================================

The tenth sutra:
Desire power ardently.

And that power which the disciple shall covet is that which shall make him appear as nothing in the eyes of men.
We will be moving more and more into contradictions. The language of religion is bound to be contradictory. On the face of it, it looks irrational. In a way it is, because it goes beyond reason, it transcends reason. This sutra says: Desire power ardently – but that power which makes you nothing. You become a non-being.
We desire power to become something. The power that wealth can give, the power that politics can give, the power that prestige can give… We desire power to be something, and this sutra says: Desire power ardently – but that power which makes you nobody, nothing.
There are two types of power. One: that which you can accumulate from others – that which can be given to you by others or can be taken by you from others. It depends on others. The power that depends on others will make you somebody in the eyes of others. You will remain the same as you were, but in the eyes of others you will become somebody. This somebodyness is what is meant by the ego – and the ego is the barrier.
Desire that power – the second type – that allows you to feel that you are nobody. It is difficult to feel “I am nobody.” Everyone thinks that he is somebody, whether others agree or not. Everyone thinks that he is somebody. This is ordinariness: every ordinary mind thinks that he is somebody. The moment you come to realize that you are nobody, you have become extraordinary, rare, a unique flower, incomparable.
This feeling of nobodyness creates space within you.
The ego dissolves, your false center is no longer there. You have become roomy, now the eternal can enter you. Now, this space, this emptiness, can allow existence to flower in you.
You are filled with your somebodyness: you are this and that. The mind is so cunning that you can even create this somebodyness through nobodyness. I will tell you an anecdote:

An emperor, a Mohammedan emperor, was praying in the mosque on a religious day. He was talking to the divine and saying, “I am nobody. I am nothing. Have mercy on me.”
Then suddenly he heard a beggar who was also praying nearby. He was also saying, “I am nobody. Have mercy on me.”
The emperor felt offended. He looked at the beggar and said, “Listen, who is trying to compete with me? When I say ‘I am nobody,’ who else dares to say ‘I am nobody’? Who is trying to compete with me?”

You can be a competitor even in nobodyness. Then the point is missed. The emperor could not tolerate someone else claiming nobodyness for himself in front of him. When he is saying to God that he is nobody, he doesn’t mean that he is nobody. Through nobodyness he is creating somebodyness. You can create ego out of nothing also.
Remember that ego is power in the world; ego is impotence in the divine dimension. All that looks to be power in the world is impotence in the divine dimension. There, powerlessness is power.
Jesus goes on saying to his disciples, “Be poor, be poor in spirit.” Not only poor, because you can be poor without being poor in spirit. Then, even poverty will become a sort of richness. If you feel egoistic about it then your poverty is not poverty. It is not poverty in spirit.
So Jesus goes on repeating, “Be poor, be poor in spirit.” Otherwise you can be a beggar on the street – you have left everything – but now you cling to having left everything. You cling to it; you have made a richness out of your poverty. Now you are arrogant.
Look at sannyasins, monks, bhikkhus. Look in their eyes. They have a deep arrogance about having left the world, from having renounced. They have renounced the world, but now this renunciation has become a bank balance. They are arrogant about it, they feel superior because of it. When Jesus says, “Be poor in spirit,” he means don’t be superior to anyone. He doesn’t mean to be inferior, remember. This is the problem. He doesn’t mean be inferior because if you are inferior – if you feel that you are inferior – it is again superiority standing on its head, nothing else. Superiority standing on its head becomes inferiority. If you feel yourself inferior, there is a longing to be superior.
So when Jesus says, “Be poor in spirit,” he doesn’t mean, “Don’t be superior.” He means that, but he also means, “Don’t be inferior, just be yourself. Don’t compare yourself with others, just be at ease with yourself.”
Then you will be nobody, because somebodyness needs comparison. How can you be somebody if there is no comparison? You are more beautiful, never simply beautiful. You cannot be simply beautiful; you are always more beautiful in comparison to someone else. You are rich in comparison to someone else, you are more knowledgeable in comparison to someone else. Superiority and inferiority are always comparisons. You are somebody when compared to others. If there is no comparison then who are you? You cannot be just beautiful, can you? You cannot be just wise, can you?
Think about this: you are alone on earth and the whole of humanity has disappeared… What will you be? Wise or foolish? Beautiful or ugly? A great man or just an ordinary man? What will you be? Alone on the earth – the whole of humanity has disappeared – you will just be yourself. You will not be able to say “I am this or that.” You will not be anybody. You will be nobody.
Real sannyas, real renunciation means it is as if the whole universe, the whole of humanity, has disappeared and you are alone. There is no possibility to compare. Then who are you? – nobody. This nobodyness is power: power in the world of the divine.
Jesus says, “Those who are first in this world will be last in the kingdom of God, and those who are last here will be first in the kingdom of God.” That which is power in the world is powerlessness in the divine journey, and that which is powerlessness in the world is power in the divine journey.
This sutra says: Desire power ardently, but remember the meaning of power. It is powerlessness. It is a feeling of nobodyness, nothingness, of emptiness. And that power which the disciple shall covet is that which shall appear as nothing in the eyes of men.
The eleventh sutra:
Desire peace fervently.

The peace you shall desire is that sacred peace which nothing can disturb, and in which the soul grows as does the holy flower upon the still lagoons.
Desire peace fervently. No one desires peace. You go on talking about it, and go on deceiving yourself that you desire peace, but no one desires it – because once it is desired, peace happens. And that has not happened to you.
No one desires peace. Even if you say that you desire peace you don’t desire it, because this is one of the ultimate laws: if you desire peace it happens. Then where have things gone wrong?
Many people come to me…

A student came to me – he was just going to appear in his final MA examination. He asked me, “How can I be peaceful? How can I be silent? Help me. I desire peace. I am so disturbed, so tense.”
I asked him, “Why do you desire peace?”
He said, “I want to achieve the gold medal. The examination is about to happen. I am a first-class student but this is going to be my last examination, and I desire the gold medal. If my mind is so tense, how can I achieve it? So help me to be peaceful.”
Look at the contradiction! And this is what is happening to everyone.
I told him, “If there was to be no examination, if you had no desire to achieve the gold medal, if you had no ambition to be first-class first, would there be any disturbance within you? Would your peace be disturbed?”
He said, “No. Why should it be? Then there would be no problem. I would be at peace. But right now the examination is there and I desire the gold medal. So help me to be peaceful.”

Now, ambition is destroying his peace. He goes on clinging to his ambition – and still he desires peace. Peace in the service of ambition is impossible; peace in the service of ambition is contradictory. Ambition cannot be peaceful. The greed to succeed cannot be peaceful.
If you desire peace, desire peace for itself: don’t make it a means to something else. It cannot be made a means.
When this sutra says: Desire peace fervently, it means peace as an end, not peace as a means. No one desires means; ends are desired and, because of the ends, means are desired. But peace can never be made a means. All that is beautiful, all that is true, all that is good, all that is deep in existence cannot be made into a means – it is always the end. But we desire even God as a means. No one desires directly: we desire something else. Then the desire is false.
That’s what I mean when I say that no one desires peace unless he desires it for its own sake. You can attain it easily if it is desired as an end. Desire it for itself and it happens, because in the very desire for peace, ambition falls away; in the very desire for peace, anxiety disappears; in the very desire for peace, anguish disappears. But if you go on being ambitious – desiring success, desiring to be this or that, to be somebody – then peace will not happen to you. Then you will remain anxious, anxiety-ridden, tense. You will remain in anguish and whatever you do will not be of any help. So, be clear about it. If you want peace, desire it directly as an end. Then the very desire for peace transforms you.
Really, peace is natural. It is not something to be desired. You disturb it; it is already there. Peace is natural to you, it is your very being. You disturb it by ambition, you disturb it by greed, you disturb it by anger, you disturb it by violence. It is always there, but you have disturbed it.
Don’t disturb it! If you really desire it, you will not disturb it. Then you will feel it. To attain peace, one has to remove through negation. Just look at why you are not at peace. Why? Then, remove the cause. Find out why you are not at peace. If ambition is disturbing it, then remove the ambition and peace will happen. Peace is already there, you need not try for it. Just be aware of why you are disturbing it, and don’t disturb it, that’s all. And it will happen. That’s why I say that when peace is really desired it happens immediately. Not even for a single moment does one have to wait.
The twelfth sutra:
Desire possessions above all.
This sutra seems very dangerous: Desire possessions above all. Possessions? The very word will create a disturbance in your mind because all the great teachers have taught: don’t desire possessions. Buddha says, “Be nonpossessive.” Mahavira says, “Aparigraha: nonpossession.” Jesus says, “Leave all riches, all possessions.”
Jesus says, “It is easier for a camel to pass through the eye of a needle than for a rich man to pass through the gate of the kingdom of my God.” This sutra says: Desire possessions above all. But the sutra is beautiful. It means the same thing that Mahavira and Buddha and Jesus are saying, but it says it in a very contradictory way.
It says that all those things that you think are possessions are not possessions because you cannot really possess them. Can you possess things? Can you possess others? Can you possess anything in the world? You can only deceive yourself that you possess something. You cannot really possess anything because death will destroy everything.
Another thing: whatsoever you possess becomes your possessor. The possessor is possessed by his possessions. You become a slave, you are never the master. So what is the use of saying that you possess the world? No one possesses anything. Only one thing can be possessed and that is your own self. Nothing else can be possessed.
You can become master only of your own self.
If you try to be the master of someone else you will be just a slave. You may call this slavery mastery, you may label it mastery. You can deceive yourself, but deceptions are deceptions. Nothing is changed by just changing the label.
Look at your possessions, at whether you possess them. If your house is destroyed you will weep, you will scream, you will go mad; but if you die, your house is not going to weep, it is not going to go mad. So who was the real owner? The house owned you. It doesn’t care a bit about you, whether you live in it or not. Really it will feel very good if you leave; it will be more at ease. It is not dependent on you. You are just disturbing its peace. If you are dead the house will feel good. So who is the possessor?
This sutra is meaningful in this sense that only the self can be possessed and nothing else. And if you cannot possess yourself, what do you think you can possess? So be a master – the master of your own self – and don’t make any effort to possess anything.
I don’t mean to leave everything. That’s not the point. Use everything, but don’t think in terms of possessions. Use the house, but don’t be the owner. Use wealth, don’t be the owner of it. Use the whole world, but don’t think that you possess it. You are just a traveler passing through it. Tired, you rest under a tree. You don’t possess the tree, and if you don’t possess it, you will feel deep gratitude toward the tree. When you leave in the evening, you will thank it. You will feel gratitude because when you were tired and the road was hot, the tree gave you shade, the tree was cool. But don’t possess it, otherwise you will not feel gratitude.
When you possess, you don’t feel gratitude. Don’t possess your wife, don’t possess your husband. When you are tired, your wife gives you her love; feel grateful.
And if you don’t possess your wife, you will not be possessed by her. Relationship happens only when there is no possession. If there is possession, there is always conflict. Husbands and wives go on fighting – you cannot find more deeply related enemies. They are intimate enemies, they coexist just to fight with each other. The whole relationship is poisoned, just because the husband is trying to possess the wife and the wife is trying to possess the husband – and no one can possess anyone, possession is impossible!
You can only possess yourself. That’s all that is possible, everything else is impossible. But when one tries to do the impossible and to possess, everything goes wrong; the relationship is poisoned. Life becomes a misery.
All relationships are just like the tree. You are tired, and someone gives you love. You are miserable, and someone takes you close. Feel grateful, feel deeply grateful, but don’t try to possess. Possess yourself. Your life will become bliss if you possess yourself and don’t try to possess anyone else. Your life will become a hell if you don’t possess yourself and then try to possess the whole world.
Even if you are capable of creating the illusion that you possess the world you will not be happy. Only truth can make you happy – and this is the truth: no one can possess anything. Possession is the wrong dimension; it leads to hell, it leads to misery, it leads to nonsense, it leads to a poisoned life.
Desire possessions above all.

But those possessions must belong to the pure soul only, and be possessed therefore by all pure souls equally, and thus be the especial property of the whole only when united.
All those possessions must belong to the purest being within you, to the purest existence within you. Love, beauty, truth can be possessed; they belong to the purest being. But what is happening? – we try to possess a beautiful person, not beauty itself. Beauty can be possessed but you cannot possess a beautiful person. Beauty can be possessed because beauty is a quality of your own soul.
You cannot possess riches but richness can be possessed, because richness is a quality of the pure soul – not riches, richness.
A buddha is rich, incomparably rich. Look at a buddha passing through the streets begging. He has a begging bow – he is a beggar – but look inside: the earth has not seen again such a rich man. But his richness is part of his inner soul, he is rich not because of richness. He is rich because he possesses his soul. He is an emperor without an empire.

When Swami Rama went to America people were very puzzled because he used to call himself Emperor Ram – Ram Basha – and he was a beggar! The president of the United States came to meet him and asked, “But why do you call yourself an emperor, Ram Basha? Why do you call yourself an emperor?”
And Ram said, “Because I am – but without an empire. This kingdom is of the within. To you I look like a beggar but to myself I look like an emperor.
“And this kingdom is such that it cannot be destroyed, you cannot take it away. Alexander is nothing compared to me – because his kingdom is of the world and can be taken away. You cannot destroy my kingdom; even death cannot destroy it. It is my own self.”

Now be ready for the meditation.

============================================================

The thirteenth sutra:
Seek out the way.

Pause and consider awhile. Is it the way you desire, or is it that there is a dim perspective in your visions of great heights to be scaled by yourself, of a great future for you to compass? Be warned. The way is to be sought for its own sake, not with regard to your feet that shall tread it.
Seek out the way. The way is not known, and the way cannot be made known to you by others. The way cannot be given; the way cannot be stolen; the way cannot be transferred. You have to seek it.
Ordinarily, we think that we have to seek the goal – the way is already given. “There are so many ways,” people go on saying, “and they all reach the same goal. The goal has to be discovered, the goal has to be reached – but the way? The way is available. In fact, it is too available, there are too many ways.”
But it is not so, because the goal and the way are not two things. The way becomes the goal. The first step is also the last, because the way and the goal are not two things. The way, as you proceed on it, transforms itself into the goal. The real thing is not to think about the goal, the basic thinking has to be about the way. Discover the way: Seek out the way.
But our minds are so conditioned that everyone thinks that he has been given a way by birth. Someone is a Christian, someone is a Hindu, someone is a Mohammedan: they think that the way has been given to them by society, by the culture, by their education. No, the way cannot be given by anyone. Neither the society nor the culture nor education can give you the way.
You will have to seek it because, through seeking, you will be transformed.
A borrowed way is a dead way. You cannot travel on it, it will not lead you anywhere. You can believe in it, you can have consolation in it, you can postpone because of it – because you know the way, you can travel on it any day – but the moment you start traveling, the way that is borrowed, given, will be of no help.
You will have to seek your own way.
It is difficult to seek it: errors are possible. But nothing is gained without errors, so be courageous enough to err. You may move on the wrong paths, but it is better to move on wrong paths than not to move at all, because at least you will learn movement, and you will learn what is wrong. That too is good, because elimination will help. You will move on this path and find “This is wrong.” You will move on another path and find “This is wrong.” And through knowing what is wrong, you will come to understand what is right.
So don’t be afraid. Don’t be afraid to err; don’t be afraid to move on the wrong path, because those who are too afraid of being in error and of moving on the wrong path become paralyzed. Then they remain where they are, they never move.
Be courageous and seek your own path. And don’t imitate anyone else’s path. Don’t imitate. Imitation will not lead you to freedom. It is not a question of following, it is a question of seeking. Be a seeker and not a follower – and know the distinction well.
A follower is an imitator. A seeker also follows, but he is not an imitator. A seeker also follows, but he follows in order to seek, to discover. He remains alert, he remains aware.
A follower becomes blind, a follower becomes dependent: spiritually a slave. A follower throws his responsibility on someone else’s shoulders, and then hangs on. A seeker is responsible for himself. He is alert, responsible: discovering every day, experimenting every day, unafraid, vulnerable, open to any new light, ready to move into any dimension that comes to his vision. Unafraid but always ready to change. If he feels “This is wrong,” he will not say “But I have invested so much on this path. Now I cannot change.” He will throw away the path, all the investment in it; he will move to his previous state and start learning again from A-B-C.
A seeker is always ready to change; a follower is stubborn. He will close his eyes rather than see the light because he has invested so much.

A Jaina monk came to me and he said, “I have been a Jaina monk for thirty years and I know well that I have chosen a path that is not for me, but now I cannot change it, because then what would I do? I have no education. I was initiated into monkhood when I was just a child, and these thirty years of monkhood have made me totally dependent on others. I cannot do anything, I cannot do any physical labor.
“And I am so respected, even big capitalists come to me and bow down their heads. Leaders come to me and they bow down their heads. If I leave this monkhood – and I know now that this is not for me – the same people who touch my feet will not employ me even as a peon. So what am I to do?”
There was much investment: all the prestige, respect, honor was at stake.
So I told him, “If you are really a seeker, throw all this away! Be a beggar or be a peon, but don’t be false. When you know this path is not for you, then throw away all that which comes to you through this path. Don’t be false, don’t be inauthentic.”
He said, “I will think about it, but it seems difficult.”

He has been thinking about it for three years. He has not come back to see me. He won’t come: he is a follower, he is not a seeker. A seeker can throw away everything the moment he comes to realize that something is not for him. There is no hesitation.
This sutra says: Seek out the way. Be a seeker, don’t be a believer.
The fourteenth sutra:
Seek the way by retreating within.
Whenever you find something that appeals to you, to your reason, to your logic, to your mind – that looks rational, looks to be true – that is not enough. Your reason may say it is true, but it may not be. Unless you experiment with it, unless you experience something through it, nothing has been discovered. Nothing is discovered by using only logic. Logic is a help, but don’t make it the ultimate criterion. The ultimate criterion is always within: experiment and experience. And unless you experience something, don’t believe that you have found it, that the way has become revealed to you. Only through experience do theories become truths.
Seek the way by retreating within. Whenever you have found a technique, a way, retreat within, go within. Experiment with it there, in your subjectivity, in your heart. Experience it. Don’t just go on thinking about what meditation is. Do it! Only then will you know what it is. A technique may not give you any experience, then throw it away and try another. There are hundreds of meditation techniques; one technique is bound to fit you.
Humanity has been struggling for millions of years, and every type of man has attained liberation. Every type of technique has been found. You are not new, you have been before. And many like you have been before and they have traveled the path. Many techniques have been discovered. Try a technique, but be authentic, sincere when you try it. And try it with your total energy. If nothing comes out of a particular technique, then throw it away and move to another.
In the old days, when disciples came to a teacher, the first thing the teacher would try to observe would be whether the disciple suited him, and whether he suited the disciple. If the teacher thought that the disciple was not meant to be with him, if he felt that the disciple would be helped more by someone else – even by someone who was against him – he would tell the disciple, “Go to that master!”
The disciple would say, “But I have heard that he is against you. He says that you are wrong.”
The teacher would say, “Don’t bother about what he says. He will suit you, his way will suit you. First go there and try.”
Go on trying different techniques, but try with your total heart. Otherwise you may throw away a technique that was right for you. So try with your total heart. If something happens, good. Move on it, move deeply. If nothing happens and you have tried with your total mind, then throw it away; it is not for you. But don’t throw it away before you have tried it – before you have tried it with your totality. Seek the way by retreating within.
And the fifteenth sutra:
Seek the way by advancing boldly without.
Even if you experiment and experience something within, there is every possibility that it may be just a delusion. It may be just a projection of the mind, it may be just a dream, may be just wish fulfillment. Don’t think that you have achieved the way. Now, whatsoever you have achieved within, try it without. Whatsoever you know within your heart, now transform it into your character; now live it. You have experienced it, now live it, make it your life.
If you feel that silence has occurred to you through an experience, now allow that silence to move, allow the ripples of the silence around you to move beyond you. Let your silence reach others. Let others also feel that you have become silent.
If you go on being angry outwardly and you say “I am a great meditator,” you are in a delusion. Don’t delude, don’t deceive, because only you will lose, no one else. Whatsoever has happened within you, if you feel that you have experienced the inner light… What is the criterion to know whether it is a delusion or a reality? – the criterion is that your outer life will change accordingly.
If you have really experienced the inner light, sex will disappear. Love will happen to you, but sex will disappear, sexuality will disappear. Love, a very loving personality, will take its place. There will be no desire for sex. If the desire for sex remains, you have not experienced the inner light. Then the inner light is just a projection of the mind.
And so on and so forth. Whatsoever you have experienced within must come out. It must be allowed to move into your life because the real test, the real criterion is there. If you have come to a deep silence, hatred will go. If hatred remains, and it has not been totally transformed into love, then you have not felt the inner silence because with hatred, inner silence is impossible. So you may have felt something cultivated, you may have cultivated a stillness.
If you go on repeating a mantra you will create a stillness that is cultivated, false, but your outer life will remain the same. If the inner changes, the outer must change. The reverse is not true: you can change the outer, there is no necessity for the inner to change. That’s what hypocrisy means. You can change the outer: you can be outwardly very loving, and filled with hatred within. You change the outer, you create a false mask, a facade.
You can see it everywhere, particularly in this country where so much religion has been taught. The only end result is a hypocritical society: masks, not real faces. Look at any face and you will find that it is unreal. Something else is hidden behind it, something quite the contrary.
You can change the outer and there is no necessity for the inner to change. But if the inner changes, it is inevitable that the outer must change. When the inner changes, the outer automatically changes. If it is not changing, then your inner change is just a delusion.
These three sutras are very meaningful:
Seek out the way.

Seek the way by retreating within.

Seek the way by advancing boldly without.

The whole nature of man must be used wisely by the one who desires to enter the way. Each man is to himself absolutely the way, the truth, and the light….

Seek it by the study of the laws of being, the laws of nature, the laws of the supernatural: and seek it by making the profound obeisance of the soul to the dim star that burns within. Steadily, as you watch and worship, its light will grow stronger. Then you may know you have found the beginning of the way. And when you have found the end, its light will suddenly become the infinite light….

Be not appalled and terrified by the…
…inner darkness…
…keep your eyes fixed on the small light and it will grow. But let the darkness within help you to understand the helplessness of those who have seen no light, whose souls are in profound gloom.
The whole nature of man must be used wisely by the one who desires to enter the way. This is very significant. The whole of you must be used. Any fragment that is used will create a problem; any fragment that is not used will create a problem.
You can discard something within you, but then you will never be a total man. You can discard anger, for example, or sex, for example. Many teachings, many religions, have taught one to discard sex. They say that sex is the enemy: “Discard it!” You can discard it, but then you are discarding a very significant part of your being. And if you discard it, how will it be transformed? Then you will always be half a man. Whatsoever you become, you will never be total, and without being total, you can never be free. The discarded part will take its revenge. The suppressed part will go on bubbling within, trying to find a way out, and you will always be in trouble.
The wisdom of the ages says: “Use all your energies. Create a harmony.” Every energy can be either destructive or creative: nothing is bad in itself. Everything can be used in such a way that even poison becomes medicine. Wisdom will never discard anything, it will use it in a creative way. It will use your anger, use your sex, use your hatred.
How can you use them? How can you use your sex? It looks as if it is your archenemy. How can you use it?
Three things will be meaningful to remember. One: why this hankering after sex? Why do you hanker for it? What do you gain through it? Observe it. By and by, as the observation deepens, sex will dissolve.
What is the real meaning of it all? Why do you hanker for it so much? – because it gives you a moment of deep meditation. It is a natural process of meditation. In sex, your thoughts cease, your mind dissolves – for a single moment, of course. For a single moment you are no longer a mind. You are there without the mind; you are mindless. That mindlessness gives you a glimpse of bliss.
Observe sex, don’t discard it. Be aware of it. Move into it with full awareness and go on trying to find out what is the innermost core of it. You will come to this innermost core: that sex gives you a sort of natural meditative moment. You become thoughtless, and that gives you bliss. Once you have found it, you can move into this thoughtless moment without going into sex. This innermost core can be attained without moving into sex. And if you can attain this, by and by, sex will disappear. Now the same energy will move into meditation, the same energy will become spiritual.
Every energy has to be used wisely. Nothing is to be discarded.
This is one of the basic things I teach: nothing has to be discarded, nothing whatsoever. You have to enter into spirituality with your total being. We will change your energies, we will change their arrangement. We will make new arrangements, new harmonies. New symphonies will be created – but nothing will be discarded.
Right now you are a puzzle: fragments with no coherence, with no inner unity. And every fragment is fighting with the other. You are a crowd – many notes but no melody. These notes can be put into a melody, and unless you do this, you will remain in misery.
This sutra says: The whole nature of man must be used wisely by the one who desires to enter the way. If you really want to enter the way that leads to the ultimate, you have to use your total energies. Nothing is to be suppressed or discarded. Everything has to be accepted in deep gratitude.
Now get ready for meditation.

============================================================

Look for the flower to bloom in the silence that follows the storm; not till then.
One of the most basic laws of life has to be understood. Life is based on polarity, everything exists with its polar opposite – and otherwise is not possible. Mind exists because of matter, matter is the polar opposite. Consciousness exists because of unconsciousness, the day exists because of the night, life exists because of death, happiness exists because of unhappiness, and so on and so forth. Everything exists with its polar opposite. You cannot experience happiness unless you have deeply experienced unhappiness, and you cannot come to the ultimate ecstasy if you have not been thrown into the ultimate agony. Hence the meaning of the world, hence this whole suffering: it is not meaningless.
People come to me and ask, “Why did God create this suffering world? Why is there so much suffering if God is compassion?” Yes, God is compassion, therefore there is so much suffering. Unless you pass through suffering, you will not reach the ultimate ecstasy. It is a basic training. Unhappiness is a basic training for the ultimate flowering of happiness.
How can you reach ecstasy if you have not known agony? Even if you were to reach the world of ecstasy without knowing what agony is, you would not be able to recognize it. The recognition would be impossible. Only through darkness can light be recognized. You may be living in light, but if you don’t know darkness you cannot know that you are living in light.
A fish in the sea cannot know that the sea exists. Only if the fish is thrown out of the sea does it come to know, come to recognize the sea. If it is thrown back into the sea, the fish will be totally different and the sea will be totally different: now she will be able to recognize it. Sansar, the world, is just a training ground. You must be thrown deeply into matter, only then can you come back to the other pole, to the peak of consciousness.
This sutra says: Look for the flower to bloom in the silence that follows the storm: not till then. The real, authentic silence happens only after you have passed through a storm. Only when the storm is over can the silence explode within you, never before. You can create a false silence before the storm, but then you are deluded. You can create stillness – artificial, cultivated, forced from without – but it is not spontaneous, it is not of your inner being.
There are many tricks to still the mind. You can use a mantra. You can sit silently in a Buddha posture and go on repeating, “Aum, aum, aum.” Go on repeating it. If you go on and on and on repeating it, you will get bored, and that boredom will look like stillness. When you get bored, the mantra will drop. A sort of sleep will be created within. Hypnos, hypnosis, a sort of sleep, will be created within. You will feel good, but that sleep is not dhyana, that sleep is not silence. That sleep is simply negative. You have become dull because of the repetition. Every repetition creates dullness: you have simply become dull. Through dullness you cannot experience misery, you cannot experience suffering. The dullness is an anesthetic – it has made you unconscious.
This is negative. Now you will be less tense, but not more alive. A silence, to be real, must be more alive and more sensitive. It must not be a sort of dullness. Through mantras you can create a facade of silence on the periphery, and you can live in that facade for lives, but you are living a false silence. A real silence comes only after the storm. Don’t force the storm to disappear.
Rather, live it, allow it to happen. Act it out, throw it out. Allow the storm to disappear from you, evaporate from you. Don’t suppress it. Suppressed, it will remain with you. Suppressed in the unconscious, it will persist and it will wait for the right moment to explode. You will always be afraid of it exploding; you will have to continuously fight it. And you can never be victorious, because that which is suppressed has to be fought again and again, has to be suppressed again and again. Your stillness will be on top of a volcano, and that volcano can erupt at any moment.
Then you will always be afraid of life, because life can create situations in which the volcano can erupt. You will negate life, you will try to escape from life. You will want to go to the Himalayas, because there, there is no one to provide an opportunity for your volcano to erupt. But the volcano is still there, and the Himalayas cannot help unless the volcano is thrown out.
And it is good to throw it out. You are missing the basic experience of completely throwing out the volcano, of totally releasing the madness, of acting out whatsoever is there: the storm within. Allow it to move without and don’t resist, don’t suppress. Allow it to move out totally. Then a moment will come when the storm has gone.
In that moment, real silence happens to you – real in the sense that now it is not cultivated, it is spontaneous. The stream is flowing. It is not anything that you have created; it is not anything that is happening because of your effort. Rather, on the contrary, you are not there, only the silence is. And this silence is fearless. Nothing can disturb it because that which could be a disturbance has been thrown out. The storm has disappeared.
Hence my insistence – so much insistence – on throwing out your madness. Within, it is dangerous. Thrown out, it disappears. Your heart becomes empty, a certain space is created. Only in that space can silence happen. Then you have room for it, you’re ready for it, open to it.
Look for the flower to bloom in the silence that follows the storm: not till then. What is that flower? The flowering of your being will happen only when real silence has happened to you, never before. You cannot force the flower to open, it opens by itself. You cannot force your being to open; there is no possibility of it. You cannot rape it, you cannot be violent toward it. It will simply be destroyed.
The flower opens by itself. The only soil needed is authentic, real spontaneous silence. With a cultivated silence, the flower will never open. With a cultivated silence, you will simply become dull. Your being will be less alive, that’s all. With less life you will be in less trouble. That’s okay, but remember: that trouble is a training. You should not try to have fewer troubles. Be with your troubles, be in your troubles and move through them. Don’t leave them, don’t escape from them. A moment will come when you have gone beyond them, but that moment always comes from passing through them. Pass through the storm and allow a real silence to come. Then your being will flower, not till then.
It shall grow, it will shoot up, it will make branches and leaves and form buds, while the storm continues, while the battle lasts. But not till the whole personality of the man is dissolved and melted… Not until the whole nature has yielded and has become subject unto its higher self can the bloom open.
Don’t think that the storm is your enemy. It is not. That storm is your greatest friend, because without it – no silence; without it – no flowering; without it – no liberation. So never think in terms of enmity. Nothing is an enemy to you: the whole of existence is friendly. Even that which appears to be against you, even that is not your enemy. Jesus says: “Love your enemies.” These arethe real enemies that you have to love – not your neighbor nor the enemy of your country, they are not your real enemies. These are your real enemies: the storm, evil, the world, sexuality, anger, passion, hatred. These are the real enemies.
Jesus says: “Love thy enemies as thyself.” Why? Christianity could never understand it. Jesus’ teaching has been completely lost; whatsoever exists in the name of Christianity doesn’t belong to Jesus Christ. It belongs to St. Paul. He is the real founder of the so-called Christianity that exists on earth.
Jesus is very esoteric. When he says “Love thy enemies as thyself,” he means that you will pass through the polar opposite, through the enemy. Experience it in its totality so that you can transcend it. Any experience that is total becomes transcendental. Any experience, I say. Experience with your totality and you have gone beyond it. It will never cling to you; you have moved away, above it. You have passed through it, you have learned everything about it.
Knowing is revolutionary. It creates a mutation, it transforms you.
While the storm lasts… Don’t think that the storm is your enemy, because meanwhile, underground, hidden in darkness, the flower will grow.
…it will shoot up, it will make branches and leaves and form buds, while the storm continues, while the battle lasts. But not till the whole personality of the man is dissolved and melted… Not until the whole nature has yielded and become subject unto its higher self, can the bloom open.
When the storm has gone, the bloom will open. But it was getting ready while the storm was there. Through the storm, it was getting ready to bloom. It was gathering energy, life, vitality. It was getting ready to burst forth. The storm is the soil, without it the flower cannot bloom.
Then will come a calm such as comes in a tropical country after the heavy rain. And in the deep silence the mysterious event will occur which will prove that the way has been found.
Only by passing through the storm will you come to a spot within you which comes …in a tropical country after the heavy rain. Remember this deeply. It will be of much help to you.
With every suffering, you are creating the possibility of ecstasy. Ecstasy will follow right after it. But if you are too engaged with the suffering, you may miss it. If you are ill, after the illness a moment of health, a moment of well-being, will come to you. But you can be too concerned with the illness, so that when the moment comes you are so engrossed, involved in the past illness – which is no longer there – you may miss that moment. And the moment is momentary; you can miss it very easily. It is atomic.
After every pain, the moment comes and visits you. After every suffering, ecstasy comes to your door and knocks, but you go on missing it because the past is so heavy. You are still ill even after the illness has gone. It continues in your memory, it clouds your mind, and you miss that atomic moment.
Remember this: whenever you are depressed, wait for the moment that the depression goes. Nothing lasts forever: the depression will go. When the depression leaves you, wait – be aware and alert – because after the depression, after this night, there will be a dawn, the sun will rise. If you can be alert in that moment, you will be happy that you were depressed. You will be grateful that you were depressed because only through that depression, this possibility; only through that depression, this moment of happiness.
But what do we do? – we move in an infinite regression. We get depressed, and then we get depressed because of the depression: a second depression follows. If you are depressed, that’s okay, nothing is wrong in it. It is beautiful because through it you will learn and mature. But then you feel badly: “Why do I get depressed? I should not get depressed.” Then you start fighting with the depression. The real depression is good, but the second depression is unreal – and this unreal depression will cloud your mind. You will miss the moment that would have followed the real depression.
When depressed, be depressed. Simply be depressed. Don’t get depressed about your depression. When depressed, simply be depressed. Don’t fight it, don’t create any diversion; don’t force it to go. Just allow it to happen, it will go by itself. Life is a flux, nothing remains. You are not needed: the river moves by itself, you are not to push it. If you are trying to push it, you are simply foolish. The river flows by itself – allow it to flow.
When there is depression, allow it to be. Don’t get depressed about it. If you want to remove it sooner, you will get depressed. If you fight it, you will create a secondary depression, which is dangerous. The first depression is beautiful, God-given. The second depression is your own. It is not God-given, it is mental. Then you will move in mental grooves – they are infinite.
If you get depressed, be happy that you are depressed and allow the depression to be. Then, suddenly the depression will disappear and there will be a breakthrough. There will be no clouds and the sky will be clear. For a single moment, heaven opens for you. If you are not depressed about your depression you can contact, you can commune, you can enter this heavenly gate. And once you know it, you have learned one of the ultimate laws of life: life uses the opposite as a teacher, as a background.
Nothing is wrong, everything is good and for the good. This is what I call a religious attitude. You may not believe in God – that makes no difference. Buddha never believed in God, Mahavira never believed in God, but they were religious. There is no need to believe in an afterlife – no need. You can still be religious. There is no need even to believe in a soul; you can be religious without believing in it.
Then what is religion? Religion means this trust: that everything is for the good. This trust that everything is for the good is a religious mind. This is religiousness. And if you trust that everything is for the good, you will come to realize the divine. The divine can be realized through such a trust.
Even the storm is for silence. Evil is for the good; death is for more life. And suffering and agony are just situations in which ecstasy can happen.
Look at life in this way, and the moment will not be far away when suffering will disappear completely, when pain will disappear completely, when death will disappear completely for you. Because one who thinks – and knows – that agony is for ecstasy, cannot be agonized. One who knows and feels and realizes that suffering is for happiness, cannot be made to suffer – impossible. He is using suffering itself to be happier, and he is using agony itself as a step toward ecstasy. He has gone beyond the clutches of the world. He has gone beyond; he has taken a jump out of the wheel of sansar.
The opening of the bloom is the glorious moment when perception awakes: with it comes confidence, knowledge, certainty….

When the disciple is ready to learn, then he is accepted, acknowledged, recognized. It must be so, for he has lit his lamp, and it cannot be hidden.

These written above are the first of the rules which are written on the walls of the hall of learning. Those that ask shall have. Those that desire to read shall read. Those who desire to learn shall learn.

Peace be with you.
Two more things to be understood: The opening of the bloom is the glorious moment when perception awakes: with it comes confidence, knowledge, certainty. Unless you experience you cannot be certain. Unless you experience, you have not known. Unless you experience, there cannot be faith. Before you have experienced, all belief is false; before it all certainty is just a facade; before it all knowledge is just information and nothing else. Remember: before your own experience don’t be too certain, because too much certainty is just a trick of the mind to hide the uncertainty within. Before your own experience, don’t say that you know, because your knowledge is just a trick to hide your ignorance.
You may have read the Gita, you may have read the Koran, you may have read the Bible. Then you know “about,” but you don’t know. You can know much about God; it doesn’t mean anything unless you know godliness. “About” is not knowledge. You can know what Jesus says, but it is borrowed, secondary, useless. You can repeat what Krishna says but it’s just mechanical. You can memorize it, you can know it by heart, but it is never in the heart; it remains in the memory. Memory is mechanical, memory is not knowledge. Knowledge comes only through experience – your own.
Insist on your own experience. If you insist, you will gain it. Those that ask shall have. But you never ask; you become contented with borrowed knowledge. You never say, “I must be allowed to know myself.” If you ask, existence is ready to give. But you are contented with books, with scriptures – with borrowed information. You never ask for the real.
Ask for the real. And the real means your experience, your own. Buddhas are of no help. They can just show the way, but you have to travel by your own feet. Insist on your own knowledge, your own experience. Never be content before that.
Those that desire to read shall read. If you are very insistent on reading the ultimate laws, they will be opened unto you. The real Bible is not in the Bible, the real Gita is not in the Gita. The real Bible or the Koran or the Gita is written in existence, in life itself. If you don’t believe in the scriptures, the real scripture will be opened unto you.
Insist that “I want to read in existence,” and the moment will be given to you. But if you don’t insist, if you carry a dead book and are content, then existence is not going to force you. Existence is absolutely nonviolent, it will not force you. You can remain with your scriptures, and if you are happy it is okay. But you are living in a false world, you are living in words.
Open the book of existence! Throw out all scriptures so that the real scripture can be encountered.
Those who desire to learn shall learn. Learning is difficult because learning means yielding, learning means surrendering, learning means becoming like a womb, becoming feminine, allowing existence to enter you. But: Those who desire to learn shall learn.
We also desire, but not to learn. We desire to collect more information. That’s not learning. Many people come to me and they say “We come to the meditation camps because many new things become known to us here.” They collect information, they collect some words, and then they go away happy. They are stupid, and their happiness is suicidal because whatsoever I say is of no use unless you experience it.
You can carry my words – then you are carrying a dead weight. You will be burdened by it, you will not be freed. My words cannot free you. They may even imprison you, they may become fetters for you. If they only become part of your memory, it would have been better if you had not come. Whatsoever I am saying is not to be remembered, it is to be experienced. And if you experience it, then it becomes your own. Then those words don’t belong to me anymore. Now, that experience has become your own. Now, you know something through your own eyes; now, you feel something through your own heart. This is knowledge, and this gives certainty and this gives faith.
Peace be with you – because only in peace does the divine become possible.
Now get ready for our meditation.

============================================================

The spiritual search starts as a seeking for eternal bliss, as a seeking for eternal liberation, as a seeking for divine light and divine life. But you remain the center. In the beginning it is self-centered: whatsoever you are seeking you are seeking for yourself.
This self-centeredness will ultimately prove a barrier, because you cannot be in total ecstasy if you are self-centered. This self-centeredness is a deep hindrance. But in the beginning it is bound to be so, it is natural that one should start the search for oneself. There is no other way – you cannot start for someone else.
It has to be self-centered in the beginning, but it must not be so in the end. In the beginning it is okay. In the end it is dangerous. A point comes where your self-centeredness must cease, only then will your being flower into total bliss.
It is just like this: you take a breath in, you inhale – this is half a breath. Then you have to exhale – that is the other half. And both breaths – inhaling and exhaling – make it a circle, a total breath. If you think only to inhale, and you see no point in exhaling – “What is the use?” – you will die. Inhaling, which is necessary for life, will become dangerous for life if there is no exhaling. The breath must be released.
The same happens when you start receiving blissful moments, when you start receiving ecstatic moments, when the eternal starts pouring on you. The first thing is inhaling: you will inhale blissfulness, but then, exhale it. Otherwise, you will die of your own blissfulness. That blissfulness will become poisonous. Exhale it, distribute it, give it to others.
When you feel that you are filled with bliss, express it. Share it, don’t try to conserve it within you. Don’t force it, don’t make it a point that it is your own. Don’t monopolize it. Allow it to be shared with everyone. Really, celebrate it in such a way that the whole of existence shares it. Just as a flower blooms and the perfume spreads – the winds take it away, far away, to the far comers of the earth – allow your perfume, your bliss, to be taken far away from you, to be shared, to be shared by existence itself.
Why? – because then bliss has become total: both inhaling and exhaling. It becomes a circle. And the more you distribute it, the more you get. The more you throw it away, the more you find it, because now you are in contact with the infinite source.
Don’t be a miser. Don’t be a miser, otherwise you will kill the whole process. In the beginning it is okay to be self-centered, but when the bliss starts happening, it is dangerous.
This sutra is concerned with this exhaling:
Out of the silence that is peace a resonant voice shall arise. And this voice will say: “It is not well; thou hast reaped, now thou must sow.” And knowing this voice to be the silence itself thou wilt obey.
You have reaped – you have reaped bliss, you have reaped ecstasy – now sow it for others. In the world, you sow first and then you reap. In the spiritual dimension, everything is just the reverse. First you reap, and then you sow.
You have reaped what Buddha has sown, what Jesus, Krishna and Mohammed have sown. They have sown seeds and you have reaped them. Now, sow them for others. And remember well that sowing is just exhaling. It is part of the whole process. You will remain half, incomplete, imperfect, unless bliss has started flowing from you toward all.
This is a very necessary law, and when you become silent, you hear it. No one else is saying it to you. Your own heart, your own innermost being gives you this indication. This teaching, this message is not from without, it is from your own innermost self. That’s why: thou wilt obey. There is no possibility of not obeying it, it is your own. But if you know it well, it will be easy.
It will be easy if you know that it is part of the process: that bliss should be distributed and shared, then it will grow more. If you don’t know about this law, your miserliness, your old self-centeredness may delay the completion of the process.
It can only be delayed, it cannot be disobeyed forever. But why delay it? So remember this: whenever you feel any moment of bliss happening, share it.
That’s why my insistence, so much insistence, that after meditation you must express your bliss, you must celebrate it. You must make it a point that whatsoever happens to you, allow it to be shared. Dance and sing. These are symbolic, just to serve as a continuous remembrance.
After you have gone from here, many things will happen if you continue meditation. But whenever something happens to you, don’t keep it to yourself. Share it. Even if you cannot do anything else, just smiling, smiling at a stranger, may be enough. Just taking the hand of a stranger in your hand and feeling the friend within him will do it, or sharing anything, just as a token. Or, if there is no one there and you are sitting under a tree, then dance and feel that you are dancing with the tree. Sing, and feel that you are singing with the birds. And sooner or later you will come to understand that when you share, even a tree is ready to share.
Some research has been done recently in a Russian university… A psychoanalyst, Pushkin, has come to conclude through many experiments that trees have similar emotions to man. Not only that – trees can be hypnotized. Not only that – if a person is hypnotized under a tree, and under hypnosis it is suggested to him, “You are very sad,” then the person becomes sad, and simultaneously the tree becomes sad.
These are experimental conclusions. There are now mechanical recording devices that can record whether you are sad or happy, whether you are depressed, whether you are angry, whether you are sexual, because with every emotion, a different electrical wave is released from your mind. That electrical wave can be recorded.
But this has been a very strange conclusion: that the same wave is recorded from the tree. You are dancing under a tree, happy… Your mind will give an indication that you are happy and it will be recorded. If the device is also connected to the tree, the tree records the same wave. So, Pushkin says that if you are dancing under a tree, very happy, the tree shares it. It is happy with you.
And if a tree can share it, why not birds? They are more alive. Why not animals? They are still more alive. And why not the whole of existence? Sooner or later we will find that even stones share. Their soul may be hidden very deep, but it is there, and one day we are going to find instruments that will give us indications that even a stone, a rock, has emotions.
So wherever you are, whenever you feel that some ecstatic emotion has happened to you, dance to its tune, sing to its tune, and share your happiness in whatsoever way happens to you, in whatsoever way you feel to share it. But share it! It will grow. With sharing, it grows. With miserliness – with not sharing – it dies away, it shrinks.
Death is shrinkage. Shrinking is death; life is expansion. Allow it to expand. And once you know the feeling of expansion you will follow, because it is your own innermost self dictating.
Thou who art now a disciple, able to stand, able to hear, able to see, able to speak, who hast conquered desire and attained to self-knowledge, who hast seen thy soul in its bloom and recognized it, and heard the voice of the silence, go thou to the hall of learning and read what is written there for thee….

To hear the voice of the silence is to understand that from within comes the only true guidance; to go to the hall of learning is to enter the state in which learning becomes possible. Then will many words be written there for thee, and written in fiery letters for thee easily to read. For when the disciple is ready the master is ready also.
To hear the voice of silence is to understand that from within comes the only true guidance. When you are silent, really silent after the storm has passed, when you have fallen into silence spontaneously – you have not cultivated it; it has come to you, it has arisen spontaneously in you. In this silence you will come to feel and understand and realize that now the true guidance is possible from your own innermost being. Now the master, the inner master will appear to you.
Your own innermost center is your real master. Outer masters can help, but their help is basically directed toward finding this inner one. And when the inner one is found, there is no need for the outer master. You have become master in your own right.
But this happens only when you have come to realize total inner silence, without any thought, without any word, without any imagination, without any ripple of any kind. When you have come to understand and feel a ripple-less silence, a thought-less silence, non-moving – this silence becomes your inner master. Now, out of this silence, guidance will be given to you.
For when the disciple is ready the master is also ready. When you are ready to receive the inner guidance, the inner guidance comes naturally, automatically. But the disciple must be ready.
What is meant by the disciple being ready? – it means to become totally receptive, humble, egoless, surrendered, in a deep let-go. When you are not saying anything but are just receptive to listen, when you are not imposing any theories upon truth – naked, vacant and ready to allow the truth to reveal itself in its own way; you are not in any way, consciously or unconsciously, forcing anything upon the truth; you have stopped forcing, you are ready to be carried away to wheresoever the truth leads you – then, you are a disciple.
There is a difference between a student and a disciple. A student is hankering for information. A disciple is not hankering for information; his search is for knowledge, authentic experience. He is not interested in what others say; he is interested in what he can feel. The student will collect information. He will train his memory, and the more his memory is trained, the more information is accumulated, the more egoistic he will become. A student can never be humble, a scholar can never be humble. His basic search is egoistic.
Someone accumulates riches and someone else accumulates knowledge. There is no difference. Every accumulation feeds the ego. Whatsoever you accumulate, the greater the quantity, the more egoistic you will feel. So a student or a scholar is not a disciple. The very dimension is different.
A disciple is not in search of accumulation. Rather, on the contrary, he is ready to throw out all accumulations. If the truth happens, only in that emptiness he is ready to throw out all accumulations, all knowledge.
Socrates is reported to have said in his old age – he was a disciple – he is reported to have said, “Now I can say that I do not know anything. I am ignorant.”

It happened that a seer declared Socrates the wisest man in Athens. Those who heard the seer came running to Socrates and said, “Socrates, have you heard? The seer has said that you are the wisest man in Athens.”
Socrates said, “There must have been some error. Go back and tell the seer that Socrates says he knows nothing. He is absolutely ignorant.”
The people went back to the seer and told him, “Your prophecy has been denied by Socrates himself. He says, ‘I do not know anything. I am ignorant.’”
The seer laughed and he said, “Because of this I say he is the wisest man, because only a perfectly wise man can say, ‘I do not know.’”

Ignorant people always claim knowledge. The more ignorant, the more they claim they know. This is part of ignorance. A student, a pundit, a scholar all claim knowledge. They are not disciples.
And remember, if you are a student you can become a teacher but never a master. Only a disciple can become a master. If you are a student, a scholar, you can become a teacher – never a master. Only a disciple can become a master. Discipleship means egoless surrender. And once you surrender, your innermost self is revealed to you. That is the master who is waiting for you. He has been waiting for you for lives and lives.
In any moment of surrender, the master will be revealed to you. And that master is no one. It is your own innermost self, it is your own atma. So really, this can be said: when you are a perfect disciple you have become a master. You are no longer a disciple at all. Discipleship achieved, you are transformed into a master.

============================================================

These are the sutras achieved by ultimate wisdom. They are deep and sometimes very complex, even contradictory, but they are the ultimate flowering of wisdom.
When a Buddha becomes a Buddha or a Christ becomes a Christ, these sutras are then revealed. If you can understand them, even understanding will transform you. If you can feel the reality hidden in them, you will be an altogether different man. So try to understand them very deeply.
The first sutra:
Stand aside in the coming battle, and though thou fightest be not thou the warrior.

He is thyself, yet thou art but finite and liable to error. He is eternal and is sure. He is eternal truth. When once he has entered thee and become thy warrior, he will never utterly desert thee, and at the day of the great peace he will become one with thee.
Stand aside in the coming battle, and though thou fightest be not thou the warrior. We are in a constant fight with ourselves. A struggle continues night and day. The whole of life is a battlefield, but you reach nowhere. You are neither totally defeated nor are you victorious. The struggle continues, and life energy is unnecessarily dissipated. You just waste yourself and your existence. What is the cause? Why are you never victorious? Why does the struggle never end?
You fight with sex, you fight with anger, you fight with greed. You fight with everything, but still you remain in the grip of those things you are fighting. The more you fight sex, the more you are in its grip and the more you feel you have to fight more. It is a vicious circle. You fight more and then sex becomes more attractive, sex becomes more magnetic. You take many decisions not to be angry, but every decision is a failure. And the total result is that in the end you feel you are guilty, inferior. In the end you feel that you are not capable of doing anything, you feel an inner defeat.
This has happened to the whole of humanity. Humanity is so sad now – not because of anything else that has happened in this age but only because so many ages of religious fight, so many centuries of continuous religious struggle have proved to the human mind that nothing can be achieved. The human mind feels a deep failure. That failure creates sadness and depression.
Hope has become hopeless. There seems to be no way out of it. You can struggle, but everything is futile, a waste: no one achieves anything. It has not happened because the human mind is incapable of victory. It has happened because the base of the struggle is wrong, the whole effort of the struggle is wrong. Why? – because you are fighting with yourself. How can you win?
If I create a conflict between my two hands, left and right, I can go on fighting but there will be no victory and no defeat, because both hands belong to me. The urge for sex belongs to me and the urge to go beyond sex also belongs to me: they are both my hands. I can go on fighting, I can go on changing parties, sometimes being with the right hand, sometimes with the left – but nothing is going to happen because I am within both. How can there be defeat or victory? For defeat and victory at least two are needed, and I am alone, fighting with myself. This whole fight is a shadow fight, nonsense.
What to do? This sutra gives you the key: Stand aside in the…battle, and though thou fightest be not thou the warrior. Stand aside. Be a witness.
Remember this word witness. This is one of the key words in the search for spirituality. If you can understand this word and practice it, you don’t need anything else. Even this one key will open all the doors of paradise. This is a master key, any lock can be opened by it. What does it mean to stand aside?
When sex arises in you, you get identified with it. Then, when you have moved through the sex act, depression sets in because you hoped for so much and nothing has happened. You longed for too much, you expected too much, and nothing has happened. The whole thing has just been a fraud. You feel betrayed, deceived. Then, repentance sets in and you start thinking in anti-sex terms. You start thinking about how to be a brahmacharya, how to be a celibate. You think in terms of being a monk: you go against sex. Then you get identified with that “anti” attitude.
Witnessing means: when sex arises, stand aside and look at it. Don’t get identified. Don’t say, “I have become sex,” say, “Sexual desire has arisen in me. Now I must observe it.” Don’t be for it and don’t be against it. Remain quiet and calm – just an observer.
That doesn’t mean suppress it, because suppression will not allow you to know what it is. Don’t suppress it. Suppression means that you are identified with the “anti” attitude. Remember this: if you suppress, you are identified with the “anti” attitude. Don’t suppress and don’t get identified. Allow it to happen. Don’t be afraid, just wait and watch.
Move in the sex act but with a watchful eye, knowing well what is happening and allowing it to happen. Not disturbing it, not suppressing it – allowing it to become manifest in its totality, but standing aside as if you are watching someone else.
The act will move to its peak. Go with it, but always standing at the side. Know whatsoever is happening in detail. Be alert, don’t lose awareness. Then, from the peak, you will start falling down and the “anti” attitude will set in. Be alert again. Don’t get identified with the “anti” attitude. Look at what is happening: the wave has gone up to a peak, now the wave is falling down. Sex is the wave arising. Brahmacharya, the “anti” attitude toward sex, is the wave falling down.
Be aware, be alert. Don’t be for or against, don’t condemn, don’t make any judgment. Don’t be a judge, just be a witness. Don’t say, “This is good, that is bad.” Don’t say anything. Just be alert and watch what is happening. Be true to the facts; don’t give any interpretation. That’s what witnessing means.
If you can be a witness with sex and the anti-sex attitude, you will come to a great understanding. That understanding will tell you that sex and anti-sex are two poles of one wave. They are not really “anti,” they are just the rising and falling of the same wave. They are one, so there is nothing to choose. If you choose one you have already chosen the other, because it is part of it – the hidden part. If you choose one you have already chosen the other because the other cannot be separated from it. They are one, so there is no choice. Then, choicelessness happens to you.
That choicelessness is the path of victory. Now you don’t choose; there is nothing to choose. And a miracle happens: when you don’t choose, both fall away. Sex and brahmacharya both disappear and for the first time you are not in their clutches. For the first time you are not in the hold of the opposites. You have fallen out.
Witnessing is the beginning, and witnessing is the end. The first step and the last step are one. Witnessing is the means and witnessing is the goal. Then the fight goes on, but you are not the warrior. Now the fighting is on a different level. What is that different level of fighting?
Now, sex and anti-sex are simultaneously present to you. This simultaneous presence of the opposites is the fight. They fight with each other, and you remain a witness. Because they are opposites, anti-poles, they destroy each other completely and both disappear. They are of the same strength and the same energy. They cut each other out, they negate each other.
This is the fight. But you are not the warrior, you are just a witness. You are just looking from above: a watcher on the hills. Down in the valley the fight will go on, but now you are just a watcher on the tower. You just look down and you know they are fighting, the opposites are fighting. They negate each other because they are of the same strength.
Remember this: only a very deeply sexual person can become a brahmacharya. Strong sexual desire can be converted into brahmacharya. If you are just ordinarily sexual you cannot become a brahmacharya because to become a brahmacharya much energy is needed. And the opposite energies are always equivalent, so only very deeply sexual persons become brahmacharyas. Ordinary persons, with ordinary, natural sex, never move to it, they cannot. The energy to move comes from sex. Opposite energies are equivalent.
You need not fight, you need not take part from this side or that side. That is the way of defeat. Just remain aside, get out of the circle – be a witness.
It is difficult because the mind wants to choose; the mind always chooses. The mind is the chooser because, without choosing, there will be no mind. You will fall out of the mind if you fall out of choice. That’s why it is so difficult not to choose.
Even what I am saying… Many of you may choose to follow what I am saying, but you will choose to do so for a reason. People come to me and when I say, “Be a witness,” they immediately ask, “If I become a witness, will sexuality disappear?” They cannot become a witness because they have already chosen. They ask, “Will sexuality disappear if I become a witness?” They are even ready to become a witness if sexuality will disappear!
But they have chosen, they have chosen to think that sexuality is bad and brahmacharya is good. They ask me, “If I become a witness will I become brahmacharya, will I become celibate?” They are missing the whole point. I am saying, “Don’t choose,” and they have already chosen. They want to use witnessing as an instrument for their choice. You cannot use witnessing that way.

A man came to me… He was a seeker, a serious seeker, but stupid. There are many stupid seekers – serious. And when I say stupid, I mean they can’t understand what they are doing. That man came to me and I told him…
The man was suffering from sex – everyone is suffering because of sex. The suffering has gone so deep that you don’t only suffer because of your own sexuality, you also suffer because of others’ sexuality. This seems to be madness. You suffer because of your own sexuality and you also suffer because of others’ sexuality, because of what others are doing.
Enough misery can be created by your own sexuality. Why be concerned with others? But that misery doesn’t seem to be enough for you, so you go on collecting what others are doing: who is doing wrong and who is being good. Who are you to decide? From where have you got the right? Who are you to become a policeman?
The man who came to see me was a policeman. He was suffering because of what everyone else was doing. But I told him, “Don’t be worried about others; the real problem must be within you. You have not yet come to terms with your sexuality – that is the problem. Why suffer because of others? Why create other problems? Just to escape from your own? Just to be occupied? Who has appointed you to be a policeman? Why waste your life? Somewhere you must be deeply sex-obsessed, that’s why you are concerned with others.”
So he said, “You have touched the right wound. I am now sixty-five, and I am still suffering. As I become older, I suffer more. It seems that sexuality is growing with my age. The energy is less, but the sexuality is more. As death is coming near, I feel to be more and more sexual. My whole mind, twenty-four hours a day is obsessed with sex.”
I told him, “You have been continuously fighting sex.” He was a great seeker; he had remained with so many saints, so many gurus. I told him, “They have destroyed you. You have reached nowhere. Whatsoever you have been doing is wrong. Now, don’t fight sex anymore.”
The man became afraid. He said, “I have been fighting sex. And this is the result: even with fighting I am so sexual. Now you say, ‘Don’t fight it!’ Then I will become completely mad.”
So I told him, “You have tried fighting – now try the other. You have reached nowhere. Now, don’t fight!”
“Then what,” he asked, “am I supposed to do?”
I told him, “Be a witness.”
He asked, “Will the sexuality disappear then?”
I told him, “If you become a witness with a partisan view – for brahmacharya, against sex – you cannot become a witness. And if you cannot become a witness, sexuality cannot disappear. Become a witness: sexuality will disappear, but remember, brahmacharya will also disappear with it. There is no need of brahmacharya when sexuality disappears. It is part of the same game. What is the need of brahmacharya? When sexuality has disappeared, when the disease has disappeared, what is the use of the medicine? It is part of the game! You will throw out the medicine with the disease. Or will you carry the medicine? – because ‘The illness has disappeared but I will carry the medicine’” So I told him, “Brahmacharya will also disappear. But remember not to choose.”
He said, “I will try.”
After three months – I told him to come back after three months – he came and he said, “But sex has not yet disappeared.” This is what I call stupidity. “Sex has not yet disappeared, and I have been practicing witnessing for three months.”

The unconscious choice remains: sex must disappear. Then you cannot be a witness. Witnessing means no choice, choiceless awareness.
This is one of the most fundamental keys for all the diseases of the human mind. If you can become a witness, the opposites fight against each other, kill each other, and both are dead, both disappear. But if you choose one of them, you cannot be a witness.
The second sutra:
Look for the warrior and let him fight in thee.

Look for him, else in the fever and hurry of the fight thou mayest pass him; and he will not know thee unless thou knowest him. If thy cry reach his listening ear, then will he fight in thee and fill the dull void within.
Look for the warrior and let him fight in thee. Don’t be the warrior, there is no need. The warrior is the phenomenon of simultaneously presenting to your consciousness both of the opposites.
Ordinarily, only one is present. When sex is present you are not thinking of brahmacharya. When brahmacharya is present, you are not thinking of sex. One is present and the other is hidden. This is the misery.
Bring out the other simultaneously, and this will become the warrior for you. Bring them out simultaneously. When you are filled with anger, immediately bring in repentance. You always repent, but later on. When you are angry, you are angry. When the anger has done its devastation, then repentance comes in and you start taking oaths: “I am not going to be angry again.” But the anger and the repentance never meet. Allow the opposites to meet. They will negate each other.
If you go on moving from one opposite to another, you will never be victorious. You have wasted many lives, and you can waste infinite lives. But this is the secret: bring the opposites out simultaneously, allow them to be simultaneously present before you. Don’t follow one. If you follow one, the other is waiting for you. When you are bored, when you get fed up with one, the other will catch hold of you.
If they cannot meet, they cannot negate each other. You need not do anything. This is the miracle, this is the inner chemistry. Bring the opposites together and just watch them. They will fight. Allow them to fight. You need not get involved in it, just remain at the side. They will disappear together. Once present together, they will not persist: they will disappear together.
So a Mahavira is not a brahmachari. Sex and brahmacharya have both disappeared. He is just innocent, he is just like a child. A Buddha has not become non-angry: both anger and non-anger have disappeared. He is innocent: neither are there. A Krishna is neither a sansari nor a sannyasin: he neither belongs to the world nor belongs to the other, anti-world of renunciation. Both have disappeared, he is innocent.
The perfection, the wholeness of consciousness is in innocence. And when I use the word innocence I mean absence of the opposites. Absence of opposites is purity. If you have chosen one, you are not pure. The other is hidden in the unconscious: both are there.
If one is there, both will be there. The other cannot be separated, it can only be hidden. If one is there, both will be there, and if the one is not there, the other cannot be there. Both will disappear, and when both disappear the whole field of opposites disappears. Then you are innocent. That innocence is liberation, that innocence is divine, that innocence is nirvana.
The third sutra:
Take his orders for battle and obey them.

Obey him not as though he were a general, but as though he were thyself, and his spoken words were the utterance of thy secret desires; for he is thyself, yet infinitely wiser and stronger than thyself.
Find the witness, and then obey him. First find the witness and then obey him, because to find the witness means to find one’s own innermost core.
We live on two layers, two levels. One is the periphery, the world of action. The other is the innermost being, the world of no-action: the world of existence, not of doing.
All that we do is on the periphery and all that we are is at the center. We have to continuously move from the center to the periphery to do something. Whenever you are doing, you are on the periphery. Whatsoever you are doing, you are on the periphery. When you are non-doing, not doing anything, then you are at the center.
Witnessing is a non-act. Meditation is a non-act.
We are doing meditation here… For thirty minutes you are on the periphery. You are doing something: breathing, catharsis, the hoo mantra. You are doing something: you are on the periphery. When I suddenly say “Stop!” I mean, now be in the non-act, non-doing. When you suddenly stop you are thrown from the periphery to the being, to the innermost center, because when you are not doing anything you are not needed on the periphery. You need to be on the periphery only while you are doing something. When you are thrown back to your center… That center is your witness.
Once you know this center, once you recognize this center, once you have felt this center – follow the orders. You will be directed, you have found your master. Now follow whatsoever is said to you from the center and don’t listen to the periphery, because the periphery is cultivated by others and your center is untouched, virgin: it is from the divine.
The periphery is from the society. That’s why we say that a sannyasin goes beyond society. Not against society, beyond society, because now he follows his own, innermost center. He is not following anyone else. Now all orders from others are meaningless.
You have found your own being, and now that being can direct you. That being is …infinitely wiser and stronger than thyself. The you on the periphery is a weakling; the you at the center is infinitely potent. The you on the periphery is just a worldly thing; the you at the center is godliness itself.
So, first find…
Jesus has said, “First seek ye the kingdom of God. Then all else will follow.” “First seek ye the kingdom of God, and then all else will follow.” Don’t bother about other things. First find the innermost core of the kingdom of God. Then you need not worry about anything; all else will follow.
Just follow the inner voice. But how? You don’t know what the inner voice is, you don’t know what the inner is. Society has deeply confused you. It goes on saying that its own voice is your inner voice. It has placed many voices in you, just to control you from within.
It is a social need; society controls you in two ways. One: by outer arrangements – the policeman on the street, the court, the judge, the law, the government. This is the outer arrangement, but it is not enough because you can deceive the law, you can manipulate the court. And the policeman is, of course, a human being… So that arrangement is not enough. You can do whatsoever you like and you can play tricks with the law; you can find loopholes because human-made laws can be violated by other humans very easily. All that is needed is more intelligence, more intelligence than the law-makers. Then you can deceive it. So society cannot rely on the outer law because are there intelligent people, more intelligent than law-makers. They will find loopholes, and they will be illegal in a legal way, and you cannot do anything. And the more laws you create, the more loopholes.
Then society tries another way – and that is a more effective thing. It creates a conscience in you: the inner policeman, the inner court. It gives you a feeling “This is wrong” – and from the very childhood it goes on reinforcing it: “This is wrong. Don’t do this. Don’t be a thief. Don’t deceive your wife. Don’t love another’s wife,” it goes on saying.
This becomes an inner conditioning, so whenever you feel an attraction toward another’s wife, the inner voice… This is not the inner voice. This is society’s voice playing within you. The voice comes: “This is wrong, this is a sin!” and you start trembling. This is the social trick: the policeman outside and the policeman within.
I am not saying go and love someone’s wife – I am not saying that. I am simply saying that this is a social mechanism, a social device to make you a slave through yourself. And it is more successful, remember. It is more successful.
Today’s world has become less moral because this “inner voice” is not so strong; society has become incapable of reinforcing it. The outer law is greater, more complex, but the inner law has weakened, for many reasons: when people, societies lived aloof and alone it was easy to create the inner conscience. Now, the whole earth has become a village, with many societies, many inner voices conflicting. Now no one can rely on… Every child knows that whatsoever you say is “good” in India is “bad” in Pakistan.
Whatsoever you say is good for a Hindu is not good for a Jaina. Whatsoever you say, the contradictory is also true somewhere: it is not absolute. Now that we have become aware of the whole complexity of the human conscience, we know that conscience is just a social product. So many societies exist together that the hold has become weak. That’s why human societies are less moralistic now, because the inner policeman is dead, almost dead. You know that what it says means nothing: “Don’t bother about it, just observe the outer law. And try to find a way around it!” This inner policeman and its voice is not your inner voice – that’s what I am saying. Find the witness. Only then will you find out the inner voice.
The inner voice will direct you. Those directions will be absolutely different from what society says – absolutely different. But for the first time you will become religious, not simply moral. You will be moral in a much deeper sense.
Morality will not be a duty, morality will not be something imposed upon you. Morality will not be a burden; it will be spontaneous. You will be good, naturally good. You will not become a thief – not because society says, “Don’t be a thief,” – you will not be a thief because you cannot be. You will not kill because it becomes impossible. You love life so much that now violence becomes impossible. It is not a moral code, it is an inner direction.
You affirm life, you revere life. A deep reverence comes to you, and through that reverence everything follows. That is what Jesus says: “Find the kingdom of God first, and then everything will follow.”
Find the inner voice, and then everything will follow.