---
title: The Wild Geese & Water 01
series: The Wild Geese & Water 01-14
talk_number: 1
url: https://oshoworld.com/the-wild-geese-water-01
language: English
duration: 01:40:20
author: RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS
scraped_at: 2026-01-03T09:35:19.023088+00:00
---
The first question:
Osho,
Do you have a message for sannyasins and friends gathering at the Cafe Royal, London, for the “March Event?”
Anand Poonam, sannyas is a rebellion against both the past and the future. Man has either lived in the past or in the future, but never in the present, and the present is the only reality there is, nothing else exists. Existence knows only one time, that is now; and one space, that is here. But mind either lives in the past, which is no more, or in the future, which is not yet. Mind exists in the nonexistential, hence mind never comes across the reality; it cannot come across the reality by its very functioning.
Sannyas is a rebellion against the mind itself. It is a way of life in which the mind is not the master, no-mind is the master, and the mind functions only as a servant. The mind actually is a mechanism. It is good as a beautiful device of nature, but the moment the servant becomes the master there is danger, great danger, then your life is bound to be a mess, a chaos. The servant is blind, unintelligent, unaware. To live according to the mind is not to live at all, it is sheer stupidity. The mind is never original, never intelligent; it is always repetitive, it is always borrowed, it is always mechanical – hence stupid, hence unintelligent. Sannyas is a tremendous jump into reality, an escape to reality from the unreal.
There have been societies whose golden age was in the past. For example Indian society: it believes that the future is going to be darker and darker every day, that there is no hope. Hence Indian society lives in a state of depression, hopelessness, with no possibility of any change for the better. It lives in misery, poverty, sickness. And because of the idea that the golden age has already passed long ago, thousands of years ago – and we are falling, by and by, every day – it does not believe in evolution. It believes in involution, it believes in regression. It is a regressive philosophy, not a progressive one.
The West lives in the future, its golden age is yet to come: the classless society, the crescendo of communism, the world of equality and freedom, the stateless state. Those golden days are far ahead. In a way, they are both the same. If one has to choose between the two of them, then I would suggest choose a progressive stupidity rather than a regressive one – if that is the only choice! At least with the progressive stupidity you have some hope, you have some thrill, you have some excitement; you are working for a better future. It is never going to come, but at least you are occupied with beautiful dreams. It has never been there before, it is not going to be there ever in the future. It is now. It is already the case.
Adam and Eve have never been expelled from the Garden of Eden! That is my declaration, my message. That whole story is invented by the priests. Adam and Eve are still living in the Garden of Eden – they have just eaten the fruit of knowledge. And who has given them the fruit of knowledge? It is not the serpent – it is the priest, it is the theologian, it is the philosopher. The fruit of knowledge does not grow on trees! It grows in churches, in temples, in the universities. It carries degrees – PhD’s, DLitt’s, DD’s – and it comes in all shapes and all sizes.
There is the Hindu world of knowledge, the Mohammedan world of knowledge, the Christian world of knowledge. You can choose your own fruit, you can shop for it. It is available for everybody’s requirement, according to everybody’s needs. The misery that has happened to man is not because he has lost the original paradise. He is still there, but he has fallen asleep, and in his dreams he has become a Hindu, a Mohammedan, a Christian, a Jew, and whatnot: a theist, an atheist, a communist, a socialist, a fascist. Only in his dreams has he lost track of paradise and to dream simply means to live either in the memories – that is the past; or to live in fantasies – that is the future.
Anand Poonam, this is my message for the March Event in London, where thousands of sannyasins are gathering together for the first time to celebrate a new opening – the British buddhafield. Tell them, “Get rid of the past and the future, and live herenow! It is suicidal to live anywhere else than herenow because each moment that is passing is precious, so precious that you cannot get it back. Don’t waste it!”
But all the religions have been suicidal. Of course, they don’t call it suicide, they give it beautiful names: asceticism, tapascharya; but basically it is nothing but masochism, self-torture. They call it renunciation, but it is nothing but destroying yourself gradually, slowly. All the religions of the world up to now have lived with a philosophy of life denial.
My fundamental approach is that of life acceptance, total life affirmation. There is no God other than life. The very idea of God other than life is dangerous because if God is other than life, then naturally you will start choosing God against life. You will be pro-God and anti-life because life is momentary and God gives you the greed of being eternal, forever.
I say to you, there is no other God than life. Hence the question of choice does not arise at all. Live! Live totally, live passionately, live intelligently, live lovingly. Become a flame, so intense, so total, that each moment starts having the flavor of eternity.
Remember, eternity is not horizontal. It is not like a line going from A to B, from B to C, from C to D – it is not horizontal. Eternity is intensity, it is vertical. It is diving from A to a deeper A, not going to B: from A to A1, from A1 to A2, from A2 to A3. In fact as far as intensity is concerned, A is the only alphabet. In fact, the word alphabet comes from A; it comes from Arabic, alif. A is enough! And when you can get A, why bother about B?

A man with a parrot on his shoulder comes to a stop at the border crossing.
“You have to pay duty on the parrot, sir,” says the customs official.
“How much?” asks the man.
“Let’s see,” says the official, paging through his book. “Parrots: live, fifty pounds; stuffed, ten pounds.”
“Bill, don’t get any crazy ideas!” screams the parrot.

Even parrots are far more intelligent than your priests. But man has lived under the dark shadow of a suicidal approach: “Renounce life! Escape from life to the monasteries, to the deserts, to the mountain caves. Go as far away from life as possible!” Because it has been taught, and taught for so long, the mind has become conditioned to the idea that the farther you are from life, the closer you will be to God. This is just bullshit! The closer you are to life, the closer you are to existence. Existence is the very core of life.

Two castaways from a sunken ship landed on a desert island. They survived there for a few days without food or water. There was no chance of escape as the sea was full of sharks.
Finally, one of the men fell on his knees, raised his hands to the sky and implored, “God, save us! If you do, I promise that I will always go to church and sing your praises, I will never drink again, never play cards or smoke, never make love to women and never read any novels or see any movies!”
The second castaway looked at him and croaked, “Then why do you want to survive?”

The so-called religious people have lived, but one wonders for what? If going away from life is the only way to reach godliness, then why commit a gradual suicide? Why not do it quickly and be finished with it?
In fact, there are aboriginal tribes still alive in the world where nobody has ever committed suicide, the very idea does not exist. It must be because of these foolish religions that the idea has entered man’s mind. No animal in its wild state ever commits suicide, but some animals commit suicide when they are forced to live in a zoo, when they lose their freedom, when they are cramped, crowded. They need a certain space around themselves. When their territorial imperative is destroyed, when they are being disciplined by human beings according to their ideas, they start losing interest in life.
There have been cases where zoo animals have committed suicide, or gone mad, or have become sexually perverted – but it never happens in the wild. No sexual perversion, no homosexuality exists in the wild, but in zoos it exists. It is very indicative. It shows that if you put people in an unnatural environment they start losing their instinctive intelligence, they start losing their natural understanding, they start becoming crazy. Either they go mad, or they become perverted, or they commit suicide.
Humanity has been doing all these things. It has to be recognized, it is time to recognize that the religions have turned the earth into a zoo. It is these so-called saints and mahatmas who have made human beings perverted. And the most surprising thing is that they are the people who condemn all perversions – and they are the original creators of perversions! Homosexuality is a religious phenomenon. All sexual perversions started in monasteries.
Monasteries are zoos where people are forced to live according to certain ideas determined by others maybe thousands of years ago. Those clothes were not tailored for them – now they are being tailored for the clothes; they are being cut according to the clothes. The clothes may have been made by Moses or Mohammed or Jesus or Buddha and they may have perfectly fitted the people they were prepared for, but now, after three thousand years, two thousand years, or even five thousand years…
The Hindu code was written five thousand years ago – Manu wrote it – it is still being followed. In five thousand years everything has changed. If Manu came to earth, I don’t think he would be able to recognize anything; he would not be able to recognize anything at all, everything has changed. But Hindus are trying to live according to Manu – this creates perversion.
The clothes are made by ancient people according to their ideas, according to their understandings, according to their needs, according to their situations. And they are being forced upon people who have a totally different world to live in. Now, the only way is either you cut the clothes or you cut the individuals, and religions have decided to cut the individuals.
If the clothes are bigger than you, you have to be massaged and stretched and Rolfed, tortured in every possible way. Or if the clothes are shorter than you, you have to be cut, some plastic surgery has to be done on you. Your head has to be chopped off or your legs have to be chopped off. Man has to live for certain ideas – as if ideas are more important than man, as if man is made to live for ideas. I am against all this nonsense. My sannyasins have to live as individuals. I am not giving you any discipline because every discipline creates perversion, every discipline only fits the person who evolves it. Just look at all the disciplines that have been propounded down the ages.
Buddha loved to eat once a day; now that is being followed by every Buddhist. That is not right, that is dangerous. It creates guilt because if you feel hungry twice a day then you feel guilty. And if you are an American you will feel hungry five times a day! Then, how much guilt?
And, in fact, it is very strange that Buddha should have loved to eat only once a day. There is only one reason – he was born into a meat-eating family, he was born into the warrior race, the son of a king. Now, meat-eating animals eat only once a day; the lion eats only once in twenty-four hours because meat once a day is enough. It has no roughage in it. If you eat vegetables once a day you will starve because ninety percent is roughage. The meat can be absorbed totally, it is already digested by another animal. It is digested food, it is pure food. But when you are eating vegetables you have to eat many times more. Watch – monkeys are vegetarians, they eat the whole day; lions eat only once a day.
Buddha was born into a meat-eating family, purely nonvegetarian, this became his habit. Of course, when he became enlightened he dropped eating meat, but the old habit of thirty years continued. Habits don’t change so easily. But now fools are following him and they are eating once a day, and they are nonvegetarians or vegetarians – it makes no difference. If they are vegetarians they should not do it, it is dangerous to their health, it is dangerous to their energy. The same is true of every discipline – the Ten Commandments, or other religious principles.
Just the other day, a sannyasin wrote to me that he cannot go to sleep early at night, he can only fall asleep at three o’clock in the morning. Of course he feels very guilty. A religious person should go early to bed and should get up in brahmamuhurt – before the sun rises. He is feeling very guilty. Now there is no need to feel any guilt. This is perfectly okay, he is sleeping perfectly well. He sleeps for seven hours, from three in the morning to ten; he is getting enough sleep. This is his body clock, not somebody else’s principle about it; it is his body chemistry that has to be considered.
All the religious scriptures were written by old people, and old people find it difficult to sleep in the morning. A child in the mother’s womb sleeps for twenty-four hours; then out of the womb, slowly, slowly the sleep is reduced – twenty-two hours, twenty hours, eighteen hours, sixteen hours. By the time he is a young person, it is fixed somewhere between eight and six hours. As one becomes older, sleep becomes less. When one is seventy, eighty, then two or three hours sleep is enough.
And the scriptures were written by old people because of the idea that the older you are, the wiser you are. No young man has written any religious scripture; nobody would have taken note of a young man writing a religious scripture. You have to be very ancient and old, and then you can write a scripture. Age was of tremendous importance in the past. Of course these people have written that three hours’ sleep is enough; more than that is lethargy, tamas – it is not good, it is evil. This idea is good for old people.
Now this young sannyasin is unnecessarily worried. He has tried everything, his whole life he has been struggling. It is useless – the whole struggle is useless. In fact, it is now a well-known scientific fact that everybody has his own body clock and everybody has to follow his own body’s needs.
In a better society, which is more scientific, more rational, more intelligent, we would have totally different kinds of working hours. This is ugly – everybody has to go to work at eleven o’clock, everybody has to go to school at the same time, to university at the same time. This is not right. This is inhuman. Universities, offices, factories, should be open round the clock, and whenever people feel good they should work, and when they feel good they should sleep. This should be their birthright.
And, in fact, it will help immensely because every college building will function as three colleges, every office building can be used as three buildings. You will not have this traffic jam on the roads because it will all be distributed over twenty-four hours. And everybody will have a little more freedom to live according to his innermost like–dislike, his instinctiveness. My approach is of freedom. My sannyasins should live a life-affirmative philosophy, accepting, respecting whatsoever one is, not creating “shoulds” and “should-nots.” They are ugly, they are monstrous.

The Mother Superior called all the nuns of the convent together. “While walking round the convent this morning, I saw a man’s footprints outside the main gate,” she announced.
Ninety-nine nuns shrieked in terror, “Ah God!”
One nun secretly giggled, “Hee-hee!”
“I followed the footprints. They led directly into our dormitory.”
Ninety-nine nuns screamed in horror, “Ah God!”
One nun secretly giggled, “Hee-hee!”
“The footprints led to one bed, and under the bed I found a condom!”
Ninety-nine nuns gasped in fright, “Ah God!”
One nun secretly giggled. “Hee-hee!”
“The condom was used!” continued the Mother Superior.
Ninety-nine nuns squealed in disgust, “Ah God!”
One nun secretly giggled, “Hee-hee!”
“But it had a hole in it!”
Ninety-nine nuns secretly giggled, “Hee-hee!”
One nun screamed in shock, “Ah God!”

These stupid people have been dominating humanity. Beware of them!

A student social worker was doing research on the use of contraceptives and visited several women. He asked the first, “What kind of contraceptives do you use?”
She answered, “Rubbers.”
The second question was, “How do you like them?”
“Well, sometimes they slip off, but in general we manage.”
After he noted this data, he asked the neighbor of the woman the same question. She used the pill and since her lover helped her to remember to take it, they preferred this method.
When the third woman, the wife of a Christian theologian, was asked what kind of contraceptive they used, she said, “We always use a bucket, a plastic bucket. Previously we used a zinc one, but that made too much noise for the neighbors; since we use the plastic one it is okay.”
The investigator noted this data and said good-bye to the lady. However, he became very puzzled. “A plastic bucket! My professor will not believe this. I will have to go back and ask the woman how it works.” So he rang and asked the woman how it was possible with a bucket.
“Well,” said the lady, “I will explain. I am rather tall and my husband is very small and we do it standing up. My husband stands on the bucket and by the time he starts rolling his eyes, I kick the bucket away!”

Anand Poonam, tell my British buddhafield sannyasins there is no need to use buckets – zinc or plastic, it doesn’t matter. Be natural, be simple, be ordinary. There is a danger because once you become a sannyasin you can start having an old, holier-than-thou outlook. My sannyasins are not to be holier-than-thou. Remember, I don’t make any distinction between the sacred and the profane. To me the ordinary life is the only life. Yes, there is a way to live it – with beauty or ugliness, with insight or blindness, with awareness or unawareness. One can live this same ordinary life in such an exquisite, extraordinary way that it becomes sacred, but there is no other life than this. You have to learn the art of transforming this very ordinary life into something beautiful.
So don’t become theologians, don’t become missionaries. I hate missionaries! My sannyasins are not to be missionaries. Be contagious, but not missionaries. Infect people, but don’t be missionaries.

A Christian theologian was driving along a deserted road one night when his car broke down. He started looking for a place to spend the night. Finding a small cottage, he knocked on the door. It was opened by a lovely young woman. The man explained his problem. The young woman was reluctant, but the man reassured her, “Don’t be worried, madam, you can trust me. I am a Christian theologian.”
So she agreed. They shared a delicious dinner and had a pleasant evening. Before saying goodnight, the young woman put on a transparent nightdress and said to the visitor, “You can sleep here in the living room, but if you need something, just call. I will leave the door of my room open.”
She went to bed and spent an anxious night listening to the man snoring. Next morning, exhausted, she went out to feed her chickens.
The man came out, looking refreshed, and remarked, “You have a lot of beautiful chickens.”
“Yes, but only fifteen.”
“Only fifteen?” said the man. “Then why do you have two cocks for such a small number?”
“That’s not a problem,” replied the young woman. “One of the cocks is a Christian theologian!”

Be simple, be natural, be spontaneous. I teach ecstasy – and ecstasy in the ordinary life. Life has not to be in any way renounced, but transformed. Renunciation is escapism, it is cowardliness, and you have worshipped cowards as saints up to now. You have worshipped people who were not courageous enough to accept all the challenges of life – and there are millions of challenges, every moment there is a challenge. The coward escapes. The coward has to be condemned, not respected.
My sannyasins have to live in the world, totally in the world, responding to every challenge because the more you respond to the challenges of life, the more intelligent you become. Intelligence is like a sword: the more you use it, the more it remains sharp. If you don’t use it, it starts getting rusty, it loses its sharpness – it becomes absolutely useless.
Hence your saints look dull, dead. But we have been conditioned to respect these dead corpses. We have been told for thousands of years that these are the real people. They are not real at all. They are very plastic, very phony. A coward can never be a real person. Reality needs all the challenges of life, all the dangers of life, all the insecurities of life. Only then integrity arises, authenticity arises, responsibility arises.
Be in the world, but don’t be of it. Live in the world, but don’t allow the world to live in you. That is my message.
There is a Zen saying:
The wild geese do not intend
to cast their reflections.
The water has no mind
to receive their image.
The wild geese have no desire to cast their reflections on the water, and the water has no desire and no mind to receive their image – although it happens. When the wild geese fly, the water reflects them. The reflection is there, the image is there, but the water has no mind to reflect and the wild geese do not hanker to be reflected either.
This should be the way of my sannyasins. Be in the world, live in the world, live totally, without ambitions, without desires because all desires distract you from living, all ambitions sacrifice your present. Don’t be greedy because greed takes you into the future; don’t be possessive because possessiveness keeps you clinging to the past. A man who wants to live in the present has to be free of greed, of possessiveness, of ambitions, of desires.
That’s what I call the whole art of meditation. Be aware, be alert, so all these thieves have no possibility to enter and contaminate you. Be meditative, but be in the world. And it is my experience that the world helps immensely – it helps immensely to make you meditative. It gives you all the opportunities to be distracted, but if you don’t get distracted then each success becomes a tremendous joy. You remain centered, you become the center of the cyclone; the cyclone goes on roaring around you, but your center remains unaffected.
Be a lotus flower. In the East, the lotus flower symbolizes the essence of sannyas. The lotus flower grows in the mud, dirty mud. It does not escape, it remains there. It floats in the lake in water, but there is a beauty, a tremendous phenomenon: it is in the water, but the water never touches it. It is so velvety that in the morning, if you go and see, you will find dewdrops gathered on the petals of the lotus, on the leaves of the lotus; and they shine like pearls in the early morning sun. But they are not touching it. The lotus leaf or the lotus petal remains dry, it does not become wet. The dewdrops rest there, but they remain separate.
That’s the way of a true sannyasin – being in the world, but remaining untouched, unaffected by it. When meditation happens, and this is what I call meditation – being in the world and remaining untouched – love comes as a by-product.
These are the pillars of my sannyasins: first, life-affirmation, unconditional life-affirmation. These are the four pillars of my temple: second, meditation; third, love; and the fourth cannot be expressed in words. It can only be called the fourth, turiya. If you live life totally, meditatively, lovingly, you come to experience something which is inexpressible. Lao Tzu calls it Tao, Buddha calls it dhamma, and Jesus calls it Logos – different names indicating toward the nameless experience. If you prefer, you can call it God. My own liking is to call it godliness, not God because God gives you the idea of a person, and godliness simply gives you the idea of a presence.
These are the four pillars of my temple, and each sannyasin has to grow these four pillars because each sannyasin has to become a temple of godliness.

The second question:
Osho,
The Free University of Amsterdam in Holland is a university with a distinctive character, which lies in its choice of a religious position. This is formulated in the constitution and the purpose of the university.
All members of the university community are expected to act as much as they can in the spirit of this purpose, in obedience to the gospel of Jesus Christ. In the daily practice, however, it seems to be very difficult for most members of the university community to communicate with love and to enjoy their work. It seems easier just to function in a deadly serious way and to keep each other at a distance.
Do you have a message for the members of the community of this free university, who try to work in the spirit of Jesus Christ?
The first thing to be remembered is that you can function in the spirit of Jesus Christ only if you are a Jesus Christ, otherwise not. And remember also that existence never repeats itself. Two thousand years have passed, there has not been another Jesus Christ and there is not going to be any other in the future either. It is so clear. Twenty-five centuries have passed since Gautam the Buddha, and no other Buddha has happened; five thousand years have passed since Krishna, and no other Krishna has happened either. Zarathustra, Lao Tzu, Moses, all the awakened ones have remained unrepeated.
What to say about the awakened ones? Even the unawakened ones are unique! There is not anybody like you anywhere in the world – there has never been before and there will never be again. You are the only one. But religions have not accepted this simple fact. Existence is not repetitive, and it is good that it is not repetitive. Just think of a world where millions of Gautam Buddhas were sitting under bodhi trees – it would be so boring! Or millions of Jesus Christs were carrying their crosses and roaming all around the world. They would not even be able to find somebody to crucify them because others would also be carrying crosses. Who would have time to crucify anybody? It would be ugly, it would be boring. One Jesus has a beauty, many Jesuses would look as if they have been produced in a factory on an assembly line, like Ford motorcars. Every minute a car coming out, every minute a Jesus coming out – well-equipped with the cross, etcetera, with those twelve apostles following him. And they would go on coming out of the factory, round the clock. What would you do with so many Jesus Christs? What would you do with so many Mahaviras, so many Buddhas? No, it is not needed.
Each individual is unique – uniqueness is a gift from existence. But why have these religions been teaching, “Live in the spirit of Jesus Christ,” or “in the spirit of Gautam Buddha” – why? Don’t you have your own spirit? Then drink alcohol, get some spirit! Make some spirit of your own! Why Jesus Christ? What wrong has this poor fellow done to you? Can’t you stop crucifying him? Will you never be able to forgive him?
The whole idea is of imitation – “Imitate!” You have no right to be yourself, you have to imitate. You can be accepted only if you are somebody else: Buddha, Moses, Mohammed, Mahavira, Jesus, Kabir, Nanak, but not yourself. And can’t you see a simple fact? – Jesus was not Moses. He should have repeated, then he would have saved his life. He would not have been crucified by the Jews if he had lived the spirit of Moses. But he tried to create his own spirit, he tried to be an individual, and that was his crime. If he had simply repeated, he would have been respected, glorified as a great rabbi. But he became a rebel.
Everybody has to become a rebel, not an imitator. That’s why you see people living there are deadly serious, they don’t love their work, they don’t enjoy their work. How can they enjoy it? They are not doing their work. You can never enjoy somebody else’s life, howsoever beautiful it is – it is not your life. You can only enjoy being yourself. A roseflower can be blissful only as a rose. If you force a roseflower to become a marigold it will be deadly serious; it will lose all joy, all fragrance.
That’s what is happening. It is not only happening there in the so-called Free University of Amsterdam, it is happening everywhere. Hindus are trying to be like Krishnas, or Ramas; Jainas are trying to be like Mahaviras; Mohammedans are trying to be like Mohammeds; Christians are trying to be like Christ – everybody is imitative. The whole world has become full of imitation, and the whole world is looking sad. It is inevitable, this sadness. And it is not only sadness. Hidden behind this sadness is a state of schizophrenia because basically nobody can be anybody else than himself. So deep down he is himself but on top of it he is pretending to be somebody else, hence everybody is a hypocrite.
All the religions have done this to humanity: they have created a hypocrite world, a schizophrenic humanity, a split personality. This is their gift. It is a curse, but this is what they call a gift to humanity. Everybody is living a split life, a double life – from the front door, one life; from the back door, totally another. And of course, between the two he is caught in a tension, in anxiety; he cannot be totally either this or that. He is torn apart. Hence the misery in people’s eyes, the sadness, the deadness.
Nobody needs to be anybody else. Just be yourself. Show some respect to your life. Respect yourself. Love yourself because unless you respect yourself you will not respect anybody else in the world. If you cannot even respect your life, how can you respect anybody else? You can pretend, but pretension is not truth, and it is not liberating. Truth liberates. Pretension creates a bondage around you. It becomes an imprisonment, and one hates imprisonment.
It is not accidental that Friedrich Nietzsche had to declare – I say, had to declare – that God is dead and man is now free. It was not only his individual opinion, it is really the voice of the millions who have no courage to speak. If God is destroying your freedom then it is better to kill God and save freedom, rather than killing freedom and saving God.
Why should one be like Jesus Christ? Why should one live in the spirit of Jesus Christ? There is no need. He never imitated anybody. If you really understand Jesus, you should not repeat him. Buddha never repeated anybody. He could have easily become a Krishna, he had as much intelligence; he could have pretended to be a Krishna, but he never did anything like that. Hindus have not been able to forgive him because he was not following the trodden path, he was not following the crowd, he was not part of the mob psychology. He went on his own; he created his own small footpath toward truth.
Everybody has to create his own footpath. There are no superhighways toward truth, only footpaths, and they too are not ready-made, available; you have to walk and create them. You have to search for truth, and in your very search you create the path. The path is not already there so that you can simply go to the truth. The search for truth is an immense adventure; each moment one is in for a great surprise. So the whole idea is wrong, and that idea is creating the trouble. And still these people call it “The Free University”! And what kind of free university is this, which has a religious position, which has a constitution and the purpose to propagate Christianity?
“All members of the university community are expected to act as much as they can in the spirit of this purpose, in obedience to the gospel of Jesus Christ.” Then what kind of free university is this? There is only one free university in the world and it is herenow. There has never been a free university before and there is none anywhere else yet – except this one.
A free university simply means that there is no expectation from you. You are helped to be free, you are nourished to be free, you are supported to be free. You are given individuality. If there are expectations, freedom is destroyed. Expectations are a subtle way, a cunning way, to dominate. If the expectation is to live in obedience to the gospel of Jesus Christ then the whole thing is just a façade, in the name of freedom they are propagating an old slavery. Jesus is a free man, but Christians are not free.
Friedrich Nietzsche is again right when he says that the first and the last Christian died on the cross two thousand years ago – the first and the last. In fact, there cannot be anybody else who is a Christ. These are rare flowers.
You are also a rare flower. Maybe you have not blossomed yet, hence you are unaware of your rareness. And you will not blossom if you go on fulfilling these expectations. Don’t fulfill any expectations of anybody. You have only one responsibility and that is toward your own being. If you try to fulfill others’ expectations you will be in trouble because they will impose, they will dominate, they will cripple and paralyze you. They are your enemies. Anybody who expects anything from you is your enemy – beware! A real friend simply gives you freedom. Love gives freedom: there is no expectation, there is no desire to manipulate you, not even indirectly. Freedom is the highest value in life – and if freedom were there, you would have seen a totally different phenomenon.
You can see it here. People are working here – in fact I don’t think people are working anywhere else so hard, so totally, so devotedly – but there is great joy. They are rejoicing in it! People who come from the outside cannot understand it; and because they cannot understand it, they go on spreading rumors.
Just now, hundreds of newspaper clippings are coming from Germany – so many rumors, so many false statements about Vimalkirti’s death. Nobody seems to try to understand. They are all saying that he was forced, regimented, almost as if he was in the army – he was forced to do the lowest menial jobs. That is their idea, that any job is low, but they go on imposing their categories.
Yes, Vimalkirti was doing all kinds of jobs. He was cleaning the toilets, and to them this is inconceivable. The great-grandson of the last German emperor, nephew of Queen Elizabeth and Prince Philip of England, connected with almost all the royal families of Europe. One of his aunts died just two days ago, Queen Frederica, she was the Queen of Greece. Another aunt is the Queen of Spain, Princess Sophia. His own mother has three titles: Princess of Greece because she was born into the Greek royal family; Princess of Denmark because she was married to the Danish king; and then the Danish king died and she got married to the Prince of Hanover. Prince Charles is his cousin, and this Vimalkirti, Prince Welf of Hanover was cleaning toilets – naturally he must have been forced, violently forced, to do such a thing!
And they are all saying that slowly, slowly, after four years, he got promoted, he had come to a certain position – he became a guard. This is sheer stupidity, inability to understand anything. Nobody had told him to clean the toilets – he had chosen to. He was tired of being a prince, was fed up with being a prince, and wanted to know life from all dimensions. So he was a cleaner, he was a gardener, he was a group leader, he was a guard. He was doing all kinds of things and he loved all his jobs. He was immensely happy – but they would not see his happiness.
They think that there is some hierarchy here in the ashram, that cleaners are the lowest. The fact is that they are at the top. They are not only cleaners, they are the cleanest people too. When I choose my mediums most of them come from the cleaners because they are really clean!
Now Vinod Khanna is here, he is a famous Indian actor. He has lived luxuriously, and he is immensely happy to get a small room. It must be all of the same size as him, six by four! But he is immensely happy. It is the same room where Vimalkirti lived. And one should be aware – Francis House has had two enlightened persons – watch out for Vinod! And from today he is going to start work in Lao Tzu garden – a man who has been earning lakhs of rupees per month, living the most luxurious life possible in India. Now he will be under Mukta’s charge, and Mukta is a hard master! Vimalkirti was also under her charge once.
You say that people there are not working with love and are not enjoying their work. How can they? They are trying to fulfill certain expectations, they are trying to live up to certain standards. That creates seriousness; that creates sadness.
If everybody is allowed to be just as he is, accepted, respected, loved unconditionally, then whatsoever he wants to do… And all kinds of work is needed: the gardeners are needed, the cleaners are needed, the managers are needed, the trustees are needed, the guards are needed, all kinds of people are needed.
In a commune there is no hierarchy. Everybody is fulfilling his work with joy; it is because of joy that he has chosen to be in that particular work. Nobody is forcing, nobody is expecting. If he does not feel good he can change his work, there is no problem with it, he will not be condemned for it. But this is possible only when individuality is given the highest value. In this so-called Free University of Amsterdam in Holland it is not possible, the very foundation is wrong – a religious position. In fact, to start with any position is going to be wrong.
Here, we are not starting with any position; there is no religious position here. It is just a caravan of drunkards, gamblers, far closer to a pub than to a temple! Just when I was answering Poonam’s question, I remembered, “This is not right what I am saying, ‘Four pillars of my temple?’ This is not right. Four pillars of my pub!” But that would have been too much for the buddhafield in Britain, so I thought, “Let it be four pillars of the temple” because British buddhas are going to be British buddhas! I don’t have any expectations of them – they are going to be British buddhas. It is going to be a totally different kind of buddhahood.
We have only one British buddha here – Proper Sagar. The day he becomes enlightened, the whole of Britain will be enlightened! But he is coming closer, he is rising higher and higher. Now he is working in the same position as Vimalkirti – he is my guard. His duty is to open the door of my Rolls Royce. Now he is constantly thinking of only one thing, but has not been able to decide whether it is proper or not – that’s why he is called Proper Sagar – there are many Sagars here, but he is the only Proper Sagar. I gave him a hat, long ago, a beautiful hat. You could have seen it on the head of the Emperor Haile Selassie – a Haile Selassie hat. So now he is wondering and inquiring, can he wear it while he opens the door of my car? I have told Vivek, “Keep the camera ready. Whenever he wears that hat, a photograph has to be taken because sooner or later he will become enlightened – then we will need these photographs!”
When you go to the Free University of Amsterdam, first tell them: it is not a free university. It cannot be free if it goes on insisting, expecting, that people should live in the spirit of Christ.
Is it so easy to live in the spirit of Christ? Christ is not the name of a person; it is the name of the ultimate state of consciousness. It is exactly what we call in the East, buddhahood, awakenedness. Jesus is one thing; christ consciousness is a totally different phenomenon. It happened to Jesus. You can never be a Jesus, but you can be a christ. But if you are a Christian, then it is impossible to be a christ. To Christians it is impossible because once you accept that you are a Christian, you start living with the idea that you cannot be Christ – he is the only begotten son of God.
Only begotten son of God. What happened to God after that? – sterilization? And what was he doing before that? – just sitting and sitting and thinking whether to produce a child or not, for infinity? Mighty slow thinker! Then finally he gave birth to this Jesus Christ, and the name of the woman is not known because the Christian trinity has no woman in it. Perhaps the Holy Ghost functions both ways – maybe the Holy Ghost is bisexual. Ghosts are known to do strange things. Otherwise, “Father, Son and Holy Ghost,” and where is the mother? The whole story seems to be very concocted. The trinity has no woman, and then Jesus is born to a woman, and the woman has no man to father the child. Strange type of game!
Once you accept yourself as a Christian you have debarred yourself from being a christ. You have become a follower, and the follower is only an imitator. He is bound to remain plastic. Yes, you can be a christ, but for that the first thing to drop is being a Christian, or a Hindu, or a Mohammedan. You have to be a seeker of truth, and you cannot seek truth if you have already got certain prejudices. If you have already accumulated beliefs, you cannot seek and search truth.
Truth is available only to the agnostic, one who says, “I don’t know anything, but I am ready to know. I am ready to go through all the processes of knowing, but I will not believe unless I see.” Seeing should be the only cause of believing; no other way should belief enter in you. Then you can be a christ, but then you are also a buddha, and you are also a lao tzu, and you are also a jaina – because these are different names, different languages, indicating toward the same ultimate consciousness.
Tell those people that it is not a free university. You have to get rid of Christianity if you want it to be really free, you have to drop all positions. A true seeker cannot start from any position; he has to start from scratch, not with a position. He has to start utterly empty, just like a zero, a tabula rasa.
And that’s what I call meditation. Meditation makes you utterly empty of all thoughts, prejudices, concepts, beliefs, and then there is a possibility to know the truth. Knowing the truth makes you a christ, a buddha; and then naturally whatsoever you do will be done in that spirit, never before it.
Enough for today.

============================================================

The first question:
Osho,
I have heard that the German chancellor, Helmut Schmidt, declared on television that sannyasins were very dangerous people for the state and society, and should not be engaged for public service or by respectable companies any more. Lots of Germans are television-watchers and behave according to what the politicians say.
In fact, I don't want to have anything to do with society. But by being regarded as an enemy of society I don't enjoy the idea of not getting a job because of my orange clothes, or being molested by people on the street, as they very often become aggressive toward outsiders.
You said that sannyasins are meant to be a provocation for the world, but do you want us to fight or to go underground? And do you think it is cowardly that I am considering staying in India not only to be close to you but also to avoid these troubles?
It is good news! The politicians become afraid only when something really significant is happening – and they are becoming afraid all around the world. It is a good sign. It is immensely beautiful that my sannyasins are not being ignored. That’s the ugliest thing that can happen to anybody.
What the German Chancellor has said is right: sannyasins are very dangerous people. Religion is always dangerous; the moment it is not dangerous it is no longer religion at all. Jesus is dangerous, Christianity is not dangerous; hence Christianity has nothing to do with Jesus. Buddha is dangerous, Buddhists are not dangerous. They have turned against their master; they have compromised with the society, with all that is rotten, dead, traditional.
It is bound to be so if you are trying to live life authentically, lovingly. Then the politicians are bound to be against. They have created a society which is based on hatred, violence, division, distrust, cunningness, hypocrisy. To be religious simply means to be against all these things.
To be religious means to live a life full of love, joy, innocence, freedom, individuality, to the extent that even if life has to be sacrificed for the higher values of freedom, love, truth, then one sacrifices it joyously. It is worth it. Freedom cannot be sacrificed, bliss cannot be sacrificed, love cannot be sacrificed; and life is significant only if these things are flowering, blossoming. The moment these things are sacrificed there is no point in living. Then living is simply vegetating.
Socrates was given the option that if he stopped talking to people about his philosophy of truth, then he could be released from the court and he could save his life. He laughed and simply rejected the very idea. What he said is something worth remembering. He said, “To say the truth, to live the truth, is my life. If I cannot say the truth, if I cannot live the truth, then what I am supposed to live for?”
A life is life only when there is something higher in it – higher than life itself. Remember, only that which is higher than life brings significance to life, brings meaning to life. If life has nothing higher than itself then it is empty, utterly futile; then it is absurd. I am giving you something to live and something to die for – and the greatest joy in life is to have something to die for. Only when you have something to die for do you have something to live for.
This kind of threat is going to happen all over the world; it should be accepted – not only accepted, welcomed. It is good news. It is immensely satisfying that my sannyasins are making themselves felt.
It is true that I would like the society that has existed up to now to disappear. It is a very primitive society. It is almost animal, it is not yet human. Humanity has to happen, it has not happened yet, it is something still in the future. It is only a potential, it has not become an actuality; what more joy can there be than making this potential actual? What more adventure can you hope for in life? What can be more ecstatic than making a tremendous effort to introduce humanity on this condemned earth?
Unless societies disappear – German, Italian, Indian, Japanese – there cannot be a humanity. Unless these small divisions, which are absolutely pointless, are totally destroyed, totally erased, the one civilization, the one culture, the one religiousness cannot be born. I am against societies, against nations, against states because they have done enough harm to us. Look at the whole of history. It is monstrous, murderous, it is full of blood. In three thousand years’ history there have been five thousand wars. What kind of civilization, what kind of culture has there been? – as if we are here only to kill each other.
But the politician thrives on these divisions. The moment a global civilization comes into existence, these politicians are bound to disappear. How can there be a German Chancellor then, or an American President, or an Iranian Prime Minister?
The politicians and the priests have been in a very subtle conspiracy against humanity. They know one thing for certain: that they can exist only in a divided world. The religions – I mean the organized religions, the dogmatic religions, the creeds, the cults, Christianity, Hinduism, Buddhism, Jainism, Mohammedanism – they keep humanity divided. That’s how the pope, the ayatollah, the shankaracharya, the imam, and all these hocus-pocus people can exist. If humanity is one, then these people will disappear. They will become things of the past, of an ugly past, of a nightmarish past.
In the same way, if nations are no longer there – and nations are only on maps, the earth is not divided but the maps have become so important, more than the earth itself, more than humanity itself. In the so-called religions, the scriptures, the words have become so important that man can easily be killed for words. For the Bible, for the Koran, for the Gita, man can be killed and destroyed, as if man exists only for the Bible and the Koran and the Gita.
The truth is just the opposite: all these scriptures exist for man; man does not exist for any scripture. And the same is true on the outside, in the world of politics. The inner being of man is dominated by the priest and the outer side is dominated by the politician, and they are in a conspiracy, an ancient conspiracy. They both have understood the fact very clearly: keep man divided – in states, in churches, in nations, in religions – and then you will remain in power.
These power-hungry people, these egoists, are bound to be afraid of my sannyasins because this is something absolutely new that has never existed before. Jesus was followed only by a few Jews; Buddha was followed only by a few Hindus. My sannyasins belong to all kinds, all religions, all nations. The whole world has gathered together. It is the meeting of the East and the West.
My sannyasins are proving with absolute certainty that what Rudyard Kipling has said was wrong. He said, “West is West and East is East, and never the twain shall meet.” They are meeting! They have met! They have met in the being of my sannyasins.
Here no divisions exist – and we are not making any effort to destroy those divisions because I am never for fighting with darkness, I am always for kindling the light. The moment the light is there, darkness disappears. That’s where I differ from many nice people who have tried to create a certain synthesis.
Mahatma Gandhi was one. He was trying in India to create a synthesis between Christianity, Hinduism, Mohammedanism, Jainism. But to try to make an effort for a synthesis presupposes that you have accepted the division already. I don’t accept the division at all; hence there is no effort to make any synthesis.
And Gandhi failed immensely. He could not convince anybody – he could not even convince himself. His whole life he was singing a devotional song that he and his followers had made according to his philosophy: “Ishwar Allah Tere Naam – Ishwar, Allah, God, are all thy names.” But when he was killed and shot he forgot all other names, he simply remembered one name: “Hey, Ram!” He didn’t then say, “Hey, Allah!” At that moment he remembered only Rama, the Hindu god, the Hindu name for God. Suddenly from his deepest unconscious it must have arisen. He had remained a Hindu his whole life. Yes, he was trying to create a synthesis; he was finding in the Koran and the Bible the same message as is in the Gita, but the effort was basically cunning and political.
The Gita was right – that was indubitable for him; there was no question about it. The Koran could also be right if it coincided, corresponded, supported the ideology of the Gita. So he would choose only those pieces from the Koran and the Bible and the Dhammapada which were in support of Krishna’s message in the Gita, and he could not talk about other passages which were absolutely against the Gita. And he was thinking that he was creating a synthesis. He was simply reading the Gita in other scriptures, but the Gita remained the criterion.
With my people, the only criterion is your own experience, your own meditativeness – neither the Gita, nor the Koran, nor the Bible. I am not teaching you any scripture; I am trying to help you to read the scripture of your own heart. And the moment you know your own heart, the moment you become attuned with your own being, you will know that the whole humanity is one. Languages differ, but there are not many religions – there cannot be.
If there is only one science about the objective reality, how can there be many religions about the inner reality, the subjective reality? If the objective truth is one – there is nothing like Hindu physics or Christian chemistry or Buddhist biology or Mohammedan mathematics. If the objective reality is one, whether you are experimenting in India or in Russia or in America, it makes no difference, you will come to the same conclusion. Then how can it be that the subjective reality is divided into three hundred religions?
There are three hundred religions in the world and there must be three thousand sects of these three hundred religions and thirty thousand sub-sects, and so on and so forth. It is just ridiculous! Religiousness is one, love is one, truth is one, the taste of freedom is one. I am not trying to create a synthesis. I am simply creating a situation in which you can experience your own interiority. And the moment you have experienced it, you have experienced the very interiority of existence itself. Then there are no nations, no churches, no states.
The German Chancellor is right. I am against the state and society because the state and society have been destructive. They are cancerous growths in the very heart of humanity. They have to be destroyed mercilessly. Man has to become free from politics and religious politics – both are politics. Man has to transcend all divisions. Naturally the people who are nourished by divisions, who exploit the divisions, will be against me and my sannyasins.
But this is a beautiful challenge – you have to face it. And if it brings suffering, enjoy that suffering too because to suffer for anything beautiful is a benediction. One can live a very comfortable life, convenient, if one compromises with all kinds of lies, but then your life will be flat; it will not have any ecstatic peaks.
We have to fight. Of course our fight is going to be totally different. We are not going to kill people, but we are going to give a tough fight to their minds. We are not actually to behead them, but metaphorically, of course, we have to behead them! Only then will they become aware of their hearts – when they lose their heads.
You will have to suffer many things, you will lose your respectability. But do you think Jesus was respectable? The Polack Pope is respectable. See the strange ways of the world, the Polack Pope is respectable and Jesus was not respectable; Jesus was condemned like a criminal.
Al-Hillaj Mansoor was not respectable. He was murdered, butchered, and in a very cruel way. Jesus’ crucifixion is far more human because al-Hillaj Mansoor was cut up piece by piece. First his legs were cut off, then his hands were cut off, then his tongue was cut out, and then his eyes were taken out. It is the cruelest kind of murder that has ever happened. Still, he was laughing to the very end. Even the murderers became a little puzzled, “Is he mad or something?”
One of the murderers asked him, “Why are you laughing?”
He said, “I am laughing because you can kill my body, but you cannot kill me. And I am also laughing at God. You will not understand that,” he said, “because you cannot see God, but I am laughing at God too. I am telling him, ‘You can do whatsoever you want to do with me, you can come like murderers as you have come today, but I will still recognize you. I can see you in these people who are murdering me. You cannot deceive me any more. I will recognize you in any disguise you come. I have recognized you even in these murderers.’”
My sannyasins will have to suffer, but suffering in itself is not bad, suffering in itself is not misery. If you are suffering because you cannot compromise, if you are suffering because you want to live your truth, it is a joy, it is bliss. You have to become the very salt of the earth.
And I know people believe the politicians. They will create all kinds of troubles for you, but I know that only through those troubles you will grow. So whenever I hear that people are going to create trouble for you, secretly I giggle. I say, “Hee-hee!”
You have also asked, “And do you think it is cowardly that I am considering staying in India not only to be close to you but also to avoid these troubles?” It depends. It is up to you to be clear. If you want to be here just to be close to me, there is no question of cowardliness because here also you will have to face troubles – in fact many more because the main troublemaker is here! I have always enjoyed mischief and I still enjoy it – I don’t want to hide it from you. From my very childhood I have enjoyed all kinds of mischief, and my enlightenment has not made any difference. At the most it has made my mischiefs a little bit enlightened, that’s all, but the basic foundation remains the same. Of course, now I make mischief on vaster, greater planes; my canvas is bigger, but I enjoy it!
So if you want to be here just to be close to me it is beautiful, but you will not be avoiding any trouble. In Germany you will be far better off because I have not heard yet that any sannyasin has been molested in Germany, raped in Germany, murdered in Germany, but in India all these things have happened. And many cases have happened because India is far more uncultured, far more uncivilized, far more irreligious than anywhere else in the world – for the simple reason that Indians believe that they are religious. Their belief of being religious hides their irreligiousness. They are the greatest hypocrites in the whole world.
If you just want to avoid trouble, don’t be here. Germany is far better. Secondly, if you are here only to avoid troubles there, you will not be close to me; it will be a negative kind of closeness, and unless it is positive it is meaningless. If you are here to be with me, then it is perfectly beautiful. Otherwise, go to Germany and earn a positive relationship – accept the challenges there.
I am not for going underground – there is no need. Only in China and Russia have I allowed my sannyasins to remain underground. Now, two of my sannyasins from Russia are here. They have been underground there; somehow they have escaped. Only in China and Russia can it be understood that it will be impossible to declare openly, but a few Russian sannyasins are still doing it openly; they have found a beautiful way. If you are really ready then you can always find a way.
They are moving in red clothes and they say, “This is the color of Communism!” They are moving with a picture of mine in their malas and they say, “This is nobody but Karl Marx!” If one wants to find a way, one can find a way. And they are enjoying, and I love the idea – nothing is wrong in it because nobody knows about me, so they think, “Maybe this is Karl Marx.” Red is certainly a Communist color so there is no problem about it, and you can always read my books hiding them inside Das Kapital, the Communist manifesto.
But except for China and Russia I will not allow underground work anywhere else. Remain above ground and give a good fight! And I am giving you so many weapons to fight with. In fact, the people you have to fight with are already dead. Just a little push and they will fall flat on the ground. Much wrestling is not needed at all. They have been long dead, they are just standing there because nobody pushes them!

The second question:
Osho,
More and more people are putting their faith in all sorts of saints, swamis and god-men. What do you think of this phenomenon? What is your opinion on saints like Mahesh Yogi, Mother Teresa, Prabhupada, Muktananda, Satya Sai Baba, J. Krishnamurti, Anand Mai, etcetera, etcetera?
What criteria should a person use to judge the worth of a god-man and to ensure he is not taken for a ride?
The first thing to be remembered is that it is not something new that is happening today. You say to me, “More and more people are putting their faith in all sorts of saints…”
They have always done that – this is not new. In fact, less and less people are doing it now, not more and more. Otherwise, how you can explain millions of Hindus, millions of Buddhists, millions of Christians, millions of Mohammedans? In fact, everybody on the earth belongs to some kind of religion. How can you explain this?
Even Communism is a godless religion; it is a church. It has its own Bible – Das Kapital. It has its own unholy trinity: Karl Marx, Friedrich Engels, V. I. Lenin. It has its own conflicting sects, so many Communist Parties in the world: the Chinese camp, the Russian camp, just like Catholics, Protestants; Shias, Sunnis; different interpretations of their scriptures, believing in different interpreters. Somebody believes in Fidel Castro, somebody believes in Mao Zedong, and somebody believes in Tito, and somebody believes in Joseph Stalin, and somebody believes in Leon Trotsky. Communism is also the same kind of phenomenon.
A few people go to the Kaaba, a few people go to the Kremlin. It is the same phenomenon, the same pilgrimage. You are doomed if at least once in your life you don’t go to the Kaaba if you are a Mohammedan, and if you don’t go to the Kremlin at least once in your life if you are a Communist. Karl Marx’s books are worshipped, are thought to be infallible, in the same way as other religions have done with books.
So if you look, then you will not be able to say, “More and more people are putting their faith in all sorts of saints, swamis and god-men. What do you think of this phenomenon?” This has always been so.
Yes, one thing new is happening and that is: many more people are changing from one religion to another, are going astray from their forefathers. That is something new, and that is something good, that is something beautiful. It was for centuries an accepted fact that religion has something to do with your birth. It has nothing to do with your birth.
Just the other day I came across a statement of Mother Teresa. Somebody had asked her about me, and what I had said about her, and she said, “Osho has no reason to interfere with my work. He should not interfere.” Why should I not interfere? I have every reason. If a crime is happening, I have to interfere, I have to say that it is criminal.
She says she is fighting abortion by adoption – but who is responsible for abortion? – Mother Teresa, the Polack Pope, and the whole company. They are responsible for abortion because they are against contraceptives, they are against birth control. And if you are against contraceptives, against birth control, then abortion is bound to happen. First they manage that abortion should continue and then they fight abortion by adoption!
The questioner said to Mother Teresa that I had been criticizing her because she refused a Protestant child to be adopted by a Protestant family; she wanted a Catholic family to adopt the child. Responding to this, Mother Teresa said that each child has a birthright to choose his religion. But who is she to choose? The child has the birthright – that I can understand, and I accept it. And if that is true, no child should be baptized until the child is grown up and decides on his own, without any manipulation, conditioning, teaching. He should be left alone to inquire, and when he decides to become a Christian or a Buddhist or a Mohammedan, of course he has the right. But a small child, how do you decide what religion he wants to choose?
Mother Teresa was asked this, so she said, “First we decide according to what religion he has been born into.” Now, religion has nothing to do with birth. You may be born into a Hindu family; that does not mean that you have become a Hindu. You may be born into a Communist family; that does not mean that you have to become a Communist. You may be born into a family where the father is a doctor and the mother is a doctor, that does not mean that you have to become a doctor. Should it be that when two doctors give birth to a child he should immediately be given a certificate that he is an MD? This is nonsense. Religion has to be chosen.
The questioner also asked, “If you don’t know the family of the child – because many of the children you bring into your orphanage are thrown-away children, you don’t know their family, you don’t know their background – then how do you decide?” Then she said, “Because I am a Catholic and I have been bringing them up, then they should go into Catholicism, they are Catholics. I decide!”
Where is the birthright of the child then? Somebody else decides!
This old stupidity is disappearing a little bit. People have started inquiring on their own. Now the people who surround me – today there are five thousand sannyasins here; all over the earth there are now more than two hundred thousand sannyasins – these are the people who have decided on their own. This is their decision, and when religion is your own decision then it becomes a commitment, then it is involvement. Then you are fulfilling your own heart’s desire. Then there is joy and then there is love. Then it is a love affair.
In the past, people were born into a certain family and that was their religion. Today, only one new thing is happening, and that is more and more people are becoming mature, more and more people are understanding their birthright, are understanding that they have to choose their own religion. Only then can they put their heart into it; only then can they be ready, if the need arises, to sacrifice their life.
The people who chose Jesus were Jews. According to Mother Teresa they were doing something wrong. Jesus himself was a Jew, he was not a Christian – that much is absolutely certain. He had not even heard the word Christian. He lived as a Jew and he died as a Jew. And the people who had gathered around him – a small group – they were all Jews. According to Mother Teresa they must have remained Jews. Then there would have been no Mother Teresa and no Christianity! But they had chosen a path of their own; they had decided to go beyond the mob psychology. They had chosen to go against the crowd.
A religious person is always a rebel. Religion is rebellion; that’s its basic flavor, its fragrance. And now more and more people are becoming capable of doing it. This is a good sign; this shows that humanity is coming of age.
You ask me, “More and more people are putting their faith in all sorts of saints, swamis and god-men. What do you think of this phenomenon? What is your opinion on saints like Mahesh Yogi, Mother Teresa, Prabhupada, Muktananda, Satya Sai Baba, J. Krishnamurti, Anand Mai, etcetera?”
One gets the master one deserves – and that’s natural, inevitable. So I divide these saints into three categories. First, the idiots – there are millions of idiots in the world; they need their own saints, and they have every right. And what else can they do? They are idiots – whatsoever they do will be idiotic. And whenever there is demand, there is supply. So Prabhupada, Muktananda, Satya Sai Baba fulfill their needs. They are absolutely needed, otherwise the needs of the idiots will be neglected. Who will take care of them? They have every right to have their own saints, swamis and god-men.
The second category belongs to the average IQ’s. Anand Mai, Mother Teresa, Mahesh Yogi, these belong to the average – neither idiots nor intellectuals, just middlers; the followers of the golden mean. Cautiously they move, calculatingly they move. These are the people who will follow Anand Mai, Mother Teresa, Mahesh Yogi.
And the third category is of the intellectuals; they will follow people like J. Krishnamurti. His whole approach is purely intellectual.
I don’t belong to any of these categories. I belong to a fourth category: the crazies, the mad. They are the most beautiful people on the earth – they are the real people. In fact, these mad people were around Jesus, around Socrates, around Buddha, around Lao Tzu, Chuang Tzu. These are the people who have created the greatest flowers of mysticism because mysticism is a kind of madness, a madness with a method. It is going beyond mind.
When somebody goes out of his mind you call him mad. Going beyond mind is also going out of mind. The madman falls below the mind and the mystic falls above the mind, but both go outside the mind, that much is similar. Hence every mystic has some similarity with the madman, and every madman also has some similarity with the mystic. You will find some place where they overlap. But this fourth category is the real category.
For the first category…

There was once a man who traveled to a far distant land to seek enlightenment. Finally he arrived at the dwelling of a sage who was reputed to be a master of masters. At the precise moment that he was ushered into the presence of the “Great One,” a strange agitation seized him and he fell to the ground, feeling that the very earth might open up and swallow him.
“At last… At last!” he stammered, “You have stirred my innermost being, oh master!”
“Not at all – that was an earthquake,” replied the master calmly.

Now, this man reached the wrong master. He needed a Muktananda, a Prabhupada, who would have nodded, and he would have said, “Yes, this is the arousal of kundalini! Your kundalini has arisen. It happens when somebody comes to me – my kundalini triggers his kundalini.”
Now, the master must have been a man like me. He simply said the truth, “Don’t be a fool! It is just an earthquake – nothing has happened.”

An Irishman was in an airplane watching a movie. When he realized he had already seen it, he got up and walked out the door of the plane. After a long time floating in the ocean he landed on a small island.
Many years later a beautiful woman in a wet suit came out of the sea and approached the Irishman. She unzipped one of the top pockets of the suit and said, “I bet you have not had a smoke for a long time,” and she handed him a cigarette.
Next she unzipped her other top pocket and said, “I bet you have not had a drink for a long time,” and she produced a flask of whiskey from the pocket.
Slowly unzipping the front of her wet suit she said, “I will bet there is something else you have not done for a long time!”
The Irishman exclaimed, “My God! Have you got golf clubs in there too?”

Now, these people also need masters, saints, swamis, god-men, and their need is authentic, very authentic, and they are in the majority. These are the people who live in Californialand!

A politician in California was addressing a group of concerned citizens on the problem of overpopulation. “Do you realize,” he said, “that while we sit here, every minute a woman is giving birth to a child? What are we going to do about this?”
From the back of the room a voice piped up, “Well, the first thing we had better do is find that woman!”

A Polack arrived in the big city for the first time. He stood gaping at a fifty-story building which housed the country’s biggest newspaper press. He asked a passerby, “What is this huge building for?”
Seeing how naive the Polack was, the passerby said, “Why, that is where Brutus the Giant lives!”
The Polack hung around in front of the building all day, in the hope of catching a glimpse of the giant.
At ten o’clock in the evening, the same passerby saw the Polack still standing there and took pity on him.
“Look, there is not any giant in there, I was just joking.”
“Joking, my foot!” replied the Polack. “Five minutes ago a truck arrived loaded with huge rolls of toilet paper for him!”

A Polack found a twenty-dollar bill. He thought for a few minutes about how to spend it. Finally he flipped a coin. “Heads, I will eat it away; tails, I will drink it.”
The coin spun in the air, fell on his lap, and disappeared between the buttons of his fly. “Aha!” grinned the Polack. “That’s another possibility!”

For these people, Prabhupada, the founder of the Hare Krishna Movement, is almost like a magnet; he attracts the uttermost idiots in the world. That much credit must be given to him. Muktananda – he is not as great as Prabhupada but comes very close. Now he is sitting on Miami Beach – that is the right place, that’s where these people are needed.
And for the second category, the average, intelligent person: Mother Teresa, Maharishi Mahesh Yogi, Anand Mai, these people will do.

The police station received a call: “Philip’s residence!” a hoarse voice shrieked. “Get over here quick! There is a cat in the house!”
“A cat? And you called us up for that? To whom am I talking anyway?”
“Philip’s parrot!”

Average intelligence!

Murphy, the father of ten children, asked the pharmacist for a packet of contraceptives. He returned six weeks later to complain, “They did not do any good at all. My wife is pregnant again. I think they were too big, even though I cut off a droopy bit at the end!”

And for the third category, the people who are attracted to Krishnamurti…

A fat Jewish lady walked slowly home to her apartment after shopping. She had a tremendous problem: for the last block she had badly needed to fart. But she managed to hold onto it until she got into the elevator. Then, to her great relief, she let it go.
Worried, however, that the ripe smell would disturb anyone who entered the elevator before she got to her twenty-fifth-story apartment, she took out from her bag an aerosol can of pine-spray and sprayed the elevator.
At the fifth floor two professors got on. They immediately clapped their hands over their noses. After the fat Jewish lady got off at the twenty-fifth floor, one professor said to the other, “Christ, what a smell! What do you reckon it is?”
The other replied, “Smells to me as if someone has just shit behind a pine tree!”

Enough for today.

============================================================

The first question:
Osho,
Why is hugging such an incredibly effective therapeutic tool?
PS I used to think that clarity, wit, and analysis were the way, but they are all garbage alongside hugging.
Man needs to be needed. It is one of the most fundamental needs of human beings. Unless one is cared for, one starts dying. Unless one feels that he is significant to somebody, at least to somebody, his whole life becomes insignificant.
Hence love is the greatest therapy there is. The world needs therapy because the world is missing love. In a really loving world no therapy will be needed at all – love will be enough, more than enough. Hugging is only a gesture of love, of warmth, of caring. The very feel of the warmth flowing from the other person melts many illnesses in you, melts the ice-like, cold ego. It makes you a child again.
The psychologists are now well aware of the fact that unless a child is hugged, kissed, he misses some nourishment. Just as the body needs food, the soul needs love. You can give to a child all the physical needs, all the physical comforts, but if hugging is missing, the child will not grow into a wholesome being. He will remain sad somewhere deep down, uncared for, neglected, ignored. He was nursed, but he was not mothered.
It has been observed that if a child is not hugged he starts shrinking – he can even die – even though everything else has been provided for. As far as the body is concerned, every care has been taken, but no love surrounds the child. He becomes isolated, he becomes disconnected to existence.
Love is our connection, love is our very root. Just as you breathe: for the body it is absolutely essential – stop breathing and you are no more. In the same way, love is the inner breath. The soul lives by loving.
Analysis won’t do it. Wit and clarity, knowledge and scholarship won’t do it. You can know all there is to know about therapy, you can become an expert, but if you don’t know the art of love you remain only on the surface of the miracle of therapy.
The moment you start feeling for the patient, for the one who is suffering – out of a hundred cases, ninety people are suffering basically because they have not been loved. If you start feeling the patient’s need for love, and if you can fulfill the need, there will be almost a magical change in the condition of the patient.
Love is certainly the most therapeutic phenomenon. Sigmund Freud was very afraid of it, so much so that hugging was out of the question. He was not even ready to face the patient because by listening to his misery, listening to his inner nightmares, he might start feeling sympathetic. His eyes may become wet, tears may start flowing, or maybe in an unguarded moment he may take hold of the hand of the patient.
He was so afraid of any loving relationship between the therapist and the patient that he created a certain device. The patient had to lie down on a couch and the psychoanalyst had to sit behind the couch so they were not facing each other.
Remember one thing: it is by facing each other that love grows. Animals cannot grow love because they make love to each other without facing each other, so there is no friendship, no relatedness. Once they are finished with lovemaking they go their separate ways – not even saying a thank you, or good-bye, or see you soon! Animals have not been able to create friendship, family, society; for the simple reason that when they are making love they are not looking into each other’s eyes. They are not looking into each other’s face; as if their lovemaking is almost mechanical, there is no human element in it.
Man created the whole dimension of all kinds of relationships for the simple reason that he is the only animal that makes love facing the other. Then eyes start communicating, then facial expressions become a subtle language. Then the changes of mood and emotions – the joy, the ecstasy, the orgasmic glow, and intimacy grow. Intimacy needs it; it is a basic requirement.
Hence it is good to make love in light, not in darkness – at least a dim light, candlelight. Making love in darkness is just something animal in us, avoiding facing each other – a strategy to avoid.
Sigmund Freud was very afraid of love, he was afraid of his own repressed love. He was afraid that he might get into some entanglement, involvement. He wanted to be just outside, not to be involved with the person, not to become part of his interiority, not to enter deep waters, but just to remain a scientific observer – aloof, detached, cool, far away. He wanted to create psychoanalysis as if it were a science. It is not a science, and it is never going to be a science. It is an art, and it is far closer to love than to logic.
The real psychoanalyst will not avoid getting deeply into the interiority of the patient – he will take the risk. It is risky, it is going into troubled waters. You may be drowned yourself – after all, you are also human. You may get into some trouble, complexity; you may create some problems for yourself, but that risk has to be taken.
That’s why I love Wilhelm Reich very much. He is the man who transformed the whole face of psychoanalysis – by getting involved with the patient. He discarded the couch, he discarded this detached aloofness. He is a far greater revolutionary than Sigmund Freud. Sigmund Freud remained traditional, he was really afraid of his own repressions.
If you are not afraid of your own repressions, you can help tremendously. If you are not afraid of your own unconscious – if you have solved your problems a little bit – you can help greatly by getting involved in the world of the patient, by becoming a participant rather than remaining just an observer.
In fact, because psychoanalysts have their own problems, sometimes even more than the patient himself, one can understand Sigmund Freud’s fear. As far as I am concerned, I would like to make a categorical statement about it: unless a person is really awakened, enlightened, he cannot be a real, authentic therapist. Only a buddha can be a real therapist because he has no problems left. He can merge and melt into the patient. In fact, for him the patient is not the patient at all. That’s the difference between the relationship that exists between a patient and his therapist, and the relationship that exists between a disciple and a master. The disciple is not a patient; the disciple is a beloved, a loved one. The master is not just an observer, he has become a participant. They have lost their separate entities, they have become one, and that oneness helps.
Hugging is only a gesture of oneness – even the gesture helps. You are right. You ask, “Why is hugging such an incredibly effective therapeutic tool?” It is, and it is only a gesture. If it is true – not only a gesture but your heart is also in it – it can be a magical tool, it can be a miracle. It can transform the whole situation instantly.
A few things have to be understood about it. The idea that the child dies and then he becomes an adolescent; then the adolescent dies and he becomes a young man; then the young man dies and he becomes a middle-aged man; and so on and so forth – is wrong. The child never dies – nothing ever dies. The child is there, is always there, wrapped in other experiences – wrapped in adolescence, then by youth, then by middle age, then by old age – but the child is always there.
You are just like an onion, layers upon layers, but if you peel the onion, soon you will find fresher layers inside. Go on deeper and you will find fresher and fresher layers. The same is true about man. If you go deep into him you will always find the innocent child – and to contact that innocent child is therapeutic.
Hugging gives you an immediate contact with the child. If you hug somebody with warmth, love – if it is not just an impotent gesture, if it is meaningful, significant, true, if your heart is flowing through it – immediately you come into contact with the child, with the innocent child. And the innocent child, surfacing even for a single moment, makes a tremendous difference because the innocence of the child is always healthy and whole; it is uncorrupted. You have reached the innermost core of the person where no corruption has ever entered; you have reached the virgin core. Just making the virgin core throb again with life is enough – you have started, triggered, a process of healing.
Hence all the religions have used this phenomenon in different ways. Whenever Jesus prays to God he always calls him Abba, Christians have translated it as “God the Father.” That translation is not right, it is very inaccurate – in a way literally true, but the metaphor has changed. Abba can only be translated as daddy not as father. Father seems cold. Just repeat the word father and it seems so distant. “God the Father” looks like an institution! The father is really an institution, it is not a natural phenomenon. The mother is natural, the father is only the creation of a certain society. There have been societies where the father never existed.
The word uncle is far older than the word father. In a matriarchal society, people knew about the mother, but because marriage had not yet come into existence, no child knew about the father. So all the people who had been the lovers of the mother – one of them must have been the father but that was not known – so all the people who could have been the lovers were known as uncles.
In the Talmud, the Jewish God says, “Remember, I am not nice, I am not your uncle!” The uncle is always nice, the father almost never. It is very difficult to be friendly with the father; it is very easy to be friendly with the uncle. I would rather say it is better to call him “God the Uncle” than to call him “God the Father.” It is closer, nicer, more friendly. But to call him Abba is the best. Jesus is giving him a name which creates intimacy.
When you call God, Abba – Daddy – you are saying, “I am just a child. Take care of me, don’t ignore me. I cannot live without you – you are my life. Your love is my very nourishment.”
All the religions have used the idea that unless a man becomes a child again he cannot be truly religious. To be a child means to be innocent, means to be full of wonder, means to be full of awe. For the child everything is a mystery – everything. He has no answers, he has only questions. He is immensely interested in knowing, he is open. The moment you have an answer you become closed, to that extent. If you have all the answers for all the questions then you are absolutely closed, then you are not open. Your inquiry is finished, and with the inquiry finished you are dead.
A real being is always inquiring, he is always on a pilgrimage. He remains always an agnostic. All children are agnostics, neither theists nor atheists, nor Hindus nor Mohammedans, nor Catholics nor Protestants. They are simply innocent. They don’t believe in anything but they are ready to inquire, to investigate – and the inquiring heart is a healthy heart. When you are loaded with beliefs you are ill.
The Christian is ill, the Hindu is ill, the Jaina is ill – ill because they are prejudiced, ill because without seeing, they have believed, ill because they are behaving stupidly. How can you believe in something that you have not known? When you know something, there is no need to believe at all, so belief in any case is ridiculous. Either you know or you don’t know. If you know, there is no need to believe; if you don’t know, how can you believe? So belief is only for the mediocre, the stupid, the idiots. And no child is an idiot. Every child is so fresh, so alive, so full of zest that his very aliveness makes him healthy.
If you can touch the child in the patient in any way – and hugging is simply one of the most important ways.
Because I have allowed my sannyasins to hug and kiss, I am condemned all over the country for telling my people to be indulgent. If this is indulgence, then let it be indulgence! This is not indulgence at all; there is something more in it. I am telling you to be loving, and just sitting with somebody and telling him again and again, “I love you,” is not enough. At least hold the hand! Make it a reality – hug the person.

A very shy Englishman – and he must be very shy, otherwise just to be an Englishman is enough; there is no need to use the adjective shy – they are all shy! They are the most perfect gentlemen in the world. And, of course, in the same proportion they are dead too. Who has ever heard of a gentleman who is alive? If you are alive you are a man – why gentle? For what? Corpses are always gentle: they cannot do any harm, and they look so polite, so humble.
This shy gentleman was seeing a young woman for months. One full-moon night they were sitting together on the porch, looking into the garden, and beyond the garden the moon was rising. And the shy Englishman gathered courage; it must have been a real, great mighty effort. My own feeling is it must have been because of the moon; the moon drives people crazy, hence the word lunatic. Lunatic means “struck by the moon.” Lunatic comes from lunar, the moon. Moonstruck. He must have gone lunatic.
He asked the lady, “Can I… Can I kiss you?”
And the lady was really getting tired, so she said, “What do you think? I’m waiting here for a bus?”

When you love a person just verbal expressions are not enough, words are not enough, something more substantial is needed, words are only abstract. You have to do something. Hold the hand, hug the person, kiss the person, embrace the person. It is going to help you both – if you can melt in the hug you will both become younger again, fresher, livelier. And that’s the whole process of healing.
Analysis is the way of the mind, hugging is the way of the heart. The mind is the cause of all diseases, and the heart is the source of all healing.

The second question:
Osho,
I have a lot of fantasies, especially sexual ones. Even though I see how they are taking me away from life here and now, I let myself be dominated by them. According to astrology, a Scorpio has especially strong sexual desires. I am a Scorpio.
Have my fantasies anything to do with that? I would like to drop them because they make it difficult for me to relax and I think they are a large part of my prison. Could you please indicate a way?
Jane Muller, it simply shows you are a really religious person. Such great problems arise only for religious people. These are good signs. Having sexual fantasies is an indication that you are reaching toward a higher plane of spirituality. It happens only on higher planes of spirituality. Ordinary mortals don’t have such things. They may have sex, but they don’t have sexual fantasies. Sex in the genitals is perfectly good – but in the head, everything becomes topsy-turvy.
Religious people have been doing that for centuries. It is a kind of shirshasan – headstand. They stand on their heads so the sexual energy starts going to their heads, just because of gravitation. Either physically they do the headstand, or psychologically. But remember, everything belonging to its own center is healthy; whenever it starts entering another center, the territory of another center, you go insane.
The so-called religious people went insane. They created a whole insane humanity – and once you are trapped in any insanity you will start finding many things. Because of your prejudices you will not be able to see the real cause. Your prejudices will show you some cause which is not the real one and you will start fighting with that cause. The real cause remains somewhere else.
You say, “…and I think they are a large part of my prison.” They have nothing to do with your prison. Your condemnation of sex creates the prison. It is your condemnation, not your sexual energies.
You say, “Even though I see how they are taking me away from life here and now…” They are not taking you away from life. In fact, your so-called spirituality – heaven, there, far away above the clouds; and God the Father sitting on a golden throne, always looking at you like a Peeping Tom… Wherever you go, even in your bathroom, he never leaves you alone, he is always looking through the keyhole. What are you doing, what is Jane Muller doing? And not only in your bathroom, he has a hole in your head too, a small window, and he goes on looking in your head: what you are thinking, what you are doing. He is constantly after you.
This idea of God, this idea of a heaven somewhere else, this idea of attaining immortality by overpowering, controlling your sexuality, is what is taking you away from life here and now. It is not sexuality. In fact, if a fantasy is moving in your head, that is your here and now – enjoy it! But you push it aside, you say, “No, I want to go to heaven. I want to be respected as a saint.” You are pushing away your herenow.
Your fantasy is your reality. That’s what you are, that’s where you are at. Enjoy it. What is wrong with it? Just a private TV! What is wrong with it? Make it a little more colorful, make it a little more juicy. Paint it, be a little more artistic about it, be creative. It is not your problem. Your problem is some phony kind of spirituality that is dominating you – and then one has to find these stupid rationalizations.
You say, “According to astrology, a Scorpio has especially strong sexual desires. I am a Scorpio.” Now, don’t blame poor Scorpio. Stars have nothing to do with you – they have their own problems. They are having fantasies of female stars! I know one thing for certain: no star is so stupid to say, “Jane Muller is the cause of my trouble.” This is just a rationalization – avoid such rationalizations.

A parrot kept raiding the henhouse to mount the hens. The result was chickens with crooked beaks. To put a stop to this, the farmer electrified the middle rung of the roost ladder.
The next morning the parrot came again, climbed on the ladder and boasted, “Tra-la-la, tra-la-lo, get ready girls, here we go!”
When he got to the middle rung the shock almost knocked him over, causing him to cry, “Wowww! I am really in top shape today!”

Don’t be a parrot! If you are having sexual fantasies it simply shows you are a human being – not a Scorpio!
Some fool has calculated – must be a fool otherwise who is bothered about such nonsense? – that every man has a sexual fantasy arising in his head every three seconds, and a woman every six seconds. Women are far more spiritual, doubly spiritual!
Maybe that is one of the problems between men and women. Women all know that these men are sinners, continuously thinking of women. And all women have that attitude of holier-than-thou, particularly wives; they don’t show any interest. They also have sexual fantasies, but the gap is there. So whenever the husband says, “What about it today?” immediately the wife says, “Enough is enough! Today it is impossible. The servant has not turned up, the electricity has gone, my daughter is not back yet, it is too late in the night, and moreover I am having a great headache.” This is spirituality. Deep down she knows that this is a way of getting the upper hand, and he will come crawling with his tail between his legs – he will come crawling. And why miss an opportunity if you can pretend to be spiritual?
You are just a human being.

Two Martians arrive by night on earth. They land their flying saucer in a petrol station. Very cautiously they slither out of their spaceship and look at the row of petrol pumps.
“Well,” whispers one, “look at the pricks of these earthmen – they are much bigger than ours!”
“That’s true,” replied the second, “but I wonder why they stick them in their ears when they go to sleep!”

Are you having these kind of fantasies? Then you may be a Scorpio! Otherwise why not just be a human being? Why bring poor astrology in? Nothing is wrong in having sexual fantasies – perfectly good, poetic. If you fight, they will come more; if you push them away, they will rebound. If you accept them, if you just watch them, they will start evaporating.
Yes, one can transcend sex, but not by fighting. Fighting only makes the problem more complicated. It is only by witnessing that transcendence happens, and it is better to start witnessing right now.
Jane Muller, I don’t know how old you are, but the older you get, the more and more fantasies will be coming; and the older you get, less and less is the possibility of becoming a witness. The younger you are the better because the fantasies are also great – worth witnessing! When you become older they become dirty, not worth witnessing at all. They also become old, mind you. They are just like skeletons. When you are younger your fantasies are younger, and you also have enough energy to be a witness. When you are older your energy also starts getting low – and witnessing needs energy.
If you understand the whole process of witnessing, it is simple. The first requirement is not to have this antagonistic, religious idea; otherwise you can never be a witness. You are already fighting, how can you witness? Witnessing needs a non-judgmental awareness – nothing is good, nothing is bad – whatsoever is, is, and you have to see it. It is moving on the screen of the mind and you are just viewing it. When you become older you may fall asleep while you are viewing it, you may not have enough energy to witness. You will not have enough energy even to put your prejudices aside. You may not have enough energy to cleanse yourself of all kinds of nonsense that others have loaded you with.
Religious people, in their dying moment – the last moment – are full of sexual fantasies and nothing else. That’s what they have been repressing their whole life. When they were alive they could repress it, they were sitting on top of it; but when they are dying, their energy evaporates, and the repressed snake uncoils.

A famous Soviet academic, Petya, is dying, and his friend and colleague, Vasya, comes to his bedside to pay his last respects to this great old man. He finds Petya lying there with closed eyes and a sad look on his face.
Slowly he opens his eyes, looks at his friend, and then says, “Vasya, look at all those books on that wall over there – just look at them.”
“Yes, Petya,” replies his friend. “Those are your most famous works. Everyone knows what an important and…”
“Yes, yes, yes!” interrupts Petya. “But look over there at that wall – you see all those books?”
“Yes, my dear friend. Those are the translations of your works into all the languages of the…”
“Yes, but that is not the point. Look over there – do you see those books?”
“But of course. Those are the works of your students and followers. We all admire…”
“No, but you don’t understand, Vasya!” exclaims Petya. “Look, do you remember when we were students, and we were sent off to work on the collective farm?”
“Of course I remember, my friend. How could I forget?”
“And do you remember, Vasya, walking down that country road one hot summer’s day?”
“Yes, Petya, yes I do.”
“And do you remember, we passed that cornfield, and there, sitting on the top of one of the haystacks, was that pretty young Masha?”
“Yes, yes, Petya, I do! You liked her, I remember!”
“Yes,” says Petya, sinking back onto his pillow with a blissful smile on his face. “You know what I did, Vasya? I climbed up on top of the haystack and we were really starting to have a bloody good time. But you know, my friend, those bloody haystacks – just when you are really getting somewhere, whoosh! – they give way under you. I did everything I could, but every time that bloody haystack… So you see, I have just been thinking, Vasya” – Petya looked round the room – “how it would have been if we had had all these books, these bloody books, underneath us!”

An old, dying academic – at the last moment, what is he thinking about?
Jane Muller, there is still time. Don’t fight with your sexual fantasies; stop fighting. Don’t call them your prison – they are not.
You say, “Have my fantasies anything to do with that? I would like to drop them…” That’s why you are creating them; the very idea of dropping them is the cause. Drop this idea. If you want to drop anything, drop this idea. “…because they make it difficult for me to relax…” You are talking simple nonsense. Who has ever heard that sexual fantasies prevent people from relaxing? In fact, that is the only way people do relax. That’s a way of relaxing. Actual sex is also a way of natural relief.
Have you ever heard of any man or woman dying from heart failure while making love? It has not happened yet. There is not a single exception in the whole of medical history. People have died in all kinds of conditions – jogging they have died, sitting doing nothing, meditating, they have died. Doing yoga postures, standing on their head they have died, praying they have died, but never making love.
It is great exercise – it is almost like jogging. Your heart beats faster, your breathing goes berserk, you are perspiring, your blood circulates faster, your whole body is throbbing, tingling. You are in a state of madness. It is a temporary madness, but immensely relaxing. You come to a peak of madness that you call orgasm, you come to a moment of great, tense climax – and the relaxation.
Now all the heart specialists in the world are advising their patients to make love if they want to survive. For the heart it is good, it relaxes. And sexual fantasies are also not in any way anti-relaxation.
What is making you tense, Jane Muller, is your antagonism. You are in a double bind. The sexual fantasies are there and they will remain there because you want to drop them – and you don’t know how to go beyond them, you simply want to drop them. You cannot drop them that simply; you have to learn the whole art of witnessing. You can go beyond, but you cannot drop them. Of course, when you have gone beyond they are dropped, but you never actually dropped them; you simply transcended, you surpassed.
Without knowing the art of surpassing you are trying to drop them – that, and the very effort of dropping them, is making you tense. And still they are there; the more you try to drop them, the more they are there. Naturally you feel frustrated, you feel a failure, you feel guilty, and that guilt creates tension. It has nothing to do with your sexual fantasies. Relaxation and sexual fantasies are not related at all; and if they are related, sexual fantasies help people to relax.
But if you are religious then the problem arises. It is your religiousness that is creating the whole trouble for you. Drop this religiousness. Learn the art of witnessing; that is the science of transcendence. Once you have transcended you will know that those sexual energies are not thrown away, but they are transformed. The same energies have become your ecstasies. The same energies are now giving a perfume. Before they were stinking, now they are creating a perfume, a fragrance.
You ask me, “Could you please indicate a way?” If you want to drop them, I cannot indicate a way, but if you want to transcend them I can certainly indicate a way. Learn to watch – and watch blissfully. Watch joyously. Nothing is wrong in them, nothing at all. It is natural. It is your biology, it is your chemistry, it is your physiology, it is your psychology. But by watching you go beyond your physiology, beyond your biology, beyond your chemistry, beyond your psychology. You simply become a watcher, a witness. That witnessing makes you centered in your spirituality and that is the transcendence.

The last question:
Osho,
I have heard you say that parrots are better than pundits. I have also heard you praise the ignorant children more than the great knowledgeable people. I cannot understand this at all. Are you not exaggerating?
Pundit Lajjashankar Jha, do you see? You cannot understand even such a simple thing. Everybody understands it here except Pundit Lajjashankar Jha! I am not exaggerating. Truth cannot be exaggerated, it is impossible. Even if you want to, you cannot do it. Only lies can be exaggerated – they have to be exaggerated. Truth is so vast, there is no way to exaggerate it, but I can illustrate it.

The great scholarly doctor who had published many research papers – must have been something like my physician, Devaraj – had just finished his first delivery.
“Not bad,” said the old nurse who was helping him. “But it is the baby you should smack on the bottom, not the mother.”

Pundit Lajjashankar Jha, did you hear about the German professor of philosophy who had used up all of his sick days? He called in to say he was dead.

At an auction sale a brahmin pundit was trying to buy a parrot. Every time he bid, someone bid higher. Finally the auctioneer declared the bird his, but for a very high sum.
“Can he talk?” he asked the auctioneer.
“And how!” screamed the parrot. “Who do you think pushed the price up so high?”

“Are these the only two parrots you have for sale?” asked the rabbi, who used to speak only in the holy language, Hebrew, and had to keep an interpreter always with him.
“At the moment, sir, yes,” said the shopkeeper.
“Then I will take the one on the right,” said the rabbi.
“Unfortunately, sir, it is not that easy. You will have to take them both.”
“Why is that?” asked the rabbi.
“Because that one only speaks Greek, the other is his translator.”

Pundit Lajjashankar Jha, knowledgeability is not against ignorance, it is in fact a cover-up for ignorance. Knowledgeability is not wisdom. Knowledgeability is like a blind man knowing all about light, but still he remains blind. Even if you know everything about light and you don’t have a light in the room, your room remains dark.
Wisdom is like light. Whether you know anything about light or not does not matter, what matters is light.
That’s why I praise children more. At least they are simply ignorant; their ignorance has a certain innocence in it. The knowledgeable person is ignorant and cunning. He is ignorant, but hiding it – he is a hypocrite. He is cheating others and maybe cheating himself too. The child is ignorant because he is innocent, and from ignorance there is a way toward wisdom. But there is no way from knowledge. The knowledgeable person will first have to become ignorant, only then can he move toward wisdom.
Ignorance is like a crossroad – you can go in the direction of knowledge, but it never leads toward wisdom. From knowledgeability there is no way to wisdom. You will have to come back to the crossroad from where another direction opens, another dimension, that of wisdom.
Hence Jesus says, “Unless you are like small children you will not enter my kingdom of God.” And Socrates said in his ripe old age, “I know only one thing, that I know nothing.” The Upanishads say, “The person who says ‘I know,’ knows nothing, and the person who says ‘I don’t know,’ knows it.”
I certainly praise the children because I would like you to have again the same kind of innocence that children have. I would like you to be born again, to be twice born – to have a second childhood is the beginning of wisdom.
Just watch the small children – their perceptiveness, their clarity, their sensitiveness, their awareness, their intelligence – and then you will not call them just “ignorant.” Their ignorance is pregnant with wisdom, and the knowledgeable person is very dry, dead; he is not pregnant. Knowledge is sterile.

The schoolteacher was angry with little Johnny. “Your essay about ‘My Dog’ is exactly the same as your brother’s!” she shouted.
“Please, Miss, it is the same dog. What can I do?”

A young female biology teacher, wearing a rose in the plunging neckline of her dress, asks her class, “How are roses nourished?”
Little Max calls out, “With milk, Miss.”
The teacher cuffs his head and says, “Don’t be fresh! Roses are nourished with water.”
In tears, Max sobs, “I am sorry, Miss. I did not know their stems were so long!”

The teacher of a class of ten-year-olds is too shy to conduct the sex-education class and so she asks her class to make this a homework project.
Little Eddy asks his father, who mumbles something about a stork. His grandmother says he came from a cabbage patch. His great-grandmother blushes and whispers that children come from the great ocean of existence.
The next day Eddy gets called first to report on his project. He says, “I am afraid there is something wrong in my family. Apparently, nobody has had a good fuck for three generations!”

Enough for today.

============================================================

The first question:
Osho,
Please talk about the Antichrist and tell us what it could be. I have always heard it being commented upon with great fear and with no explanation. People don't know what it is and yet they fear it.
The priest has lived as a parasite; he has been sucking people’s blood – and his whole trade secret is creating fear. All the religions have been fear-oriented. When I say, all the religions, I don’t include Gautam the Buddha, Jesus Christ, Zarathustra, Mahavira, or Lao Tzu. These individuals don’t belong to any religion at all. Religions are a collective phenomenon, and the moment a collectivity, a crowd, gathers around a dogma, immediately exploitation starts.
The buddhas, the awakened ones, have not created any religions. It is an absolutely wrong notion, prevalent all over the world, that Gautam Buddha founded Buddhism, or Jesus Christ founded Christianity. It is absolutely wrong; nothing can be more wrong than that. Christianity is created by people of a totally different caliber – the unawakened ones, but cunning, clever – the priests.
Priests are the most cunning people in the world; even politicians are not as cunning. The priests even exploit the politicians. The priest is the real Antichrist, anti-Buddha, anti-Mahavira – anti-truth in a sense. The priest lives on lies, he fabricates lies. He is clever enough to exploit human misery, human fear, human greed, human possessiveness, human weakness as such.
For example, every man is born with fear; it is natural. In the mother’s womb the child is absolutely fearless; there is nothing to be afraid of. He is absolutely taken care of by existence itself; there is no worry, no anxiety, no fear. But the moment he comes out of the womb, even passing through the passage from the womb into the world, fear starts arising; he feels suffocated. The canal that he has to pass through is narrow. He feels cramped, he feels as if he is being murdered, killed.
To the child itself, birth is just like death – or even worse because when you die you simply die; there is nothing much to it; you stop breathing. But when a child is born he starts breathing, he becomes alive, and he finds himself in a very strange situation – upside-down, coming out head first. And he is losing his beautiful home. The womb has been so warm, so comfortable, that psychologists say that man searches again and again for the same comfort, the same luxury, the same warmth.
We have created houses, palaces, just because of the memory of the womb. We make them as cozy as possible, we make them as comfortable as possible, and yet there is nothing like the womb. Whatsoever you do, you will have to worry about a thousand and one things; you will have to take care of yourself. Even the greatest emperor is not as fearless as the smallest child in his mother’s womb, the poorest child.
Fear is part of the very birth process, and the first thing that a child is going to do is scream, cry. He has been uprooted from such a warm, loving, cozy atmosphere, and has been thrown into a world so cold, so alien – fear has entered.
With fear enters greed; greed is the other side of the same coin. Greed means accumulating everything that will help you to remain fearless. If money can help, then accumulate money; if power can help, then be powerful – or whatsoever it is. To protect yourself against fear, greed starts growing, and religions have exploited both instincts. Fear has become hell; greed has become heaven – these are projections.
Every child is very weak, delicate, vulnerable. He can be crushed just like a roseflower; he can be killed very easily. He depends on his parents, on his family, on the society; he is not independent.
His dependence has been exploited by the priests – hence the idea of God the protector, the almighty. If you worship him, if you pray to him, if you buttress him, if you praise him, he will protect you. If you don’t praise him, beware, you are in danger. You will be left behind all alone; God will not be with you.
People praying in churches, in temples, in mosques, are not religious people. A religious person has nothing to do with prayer; or if he has something to do with prayer, his prayer has a totally different meaning. His prayer is never out of greed, out of fear, that much is absolutely certain. His prayer is nothing but pure gratitude, no desire in it. He is not asking for something, he is not asking for more – he is not asking at all.
He is simply thanking because whatsoever has been given to him is more than he deserves. His heart is full of gratitude, tremendous gratefulness. In fact, no word is needed to express it; his very heartbeat expresses his gratitude. He is in prayer twenty-four hours a day – walking, sitting, sleeping, the prayer continues like an undercurrent. He need not go to a temple to pray, only irreligious people go.
But the larger part of humanity is full of fear, full of greed, full of anguish – the anguish that death is standing there. Any moment it can jump upon you, and you need a protector, an almighty protector.
Just see the word almighty, ponder over it. Man feels absolutely powerless; hence an almighty God is needed. Man feels ignorant; hence an omniscient God is needed. Man feels weak; hence an omnipotent God is needed. Man feels limited; hence an omnipresent God is needed. These are projections, and the priests have been using them in all possible ways, in all possible combinations.
There is an ancient story…

A disciple of the Devil came running, and said to the Devil, “What are you doing here? Our whole business is at risk – just now a man has found truth on earth. We should go and do something. If he spreads the message we will lose all our clients, all our customers!”
The Devil laughed and said, “You are new! You don’t know that there is no need to worry at all. I know one man has found the truth, but I need not go there. My agents are already there.”
The disciple said, “But I have not seen any of your agents there, I have not seen any of my colleagues there.”
The Devil said, “My agents are in disguise. The priests that are chanting mantras around the man, they are my agents! They have reached him. Now they will stand between him and the people. They will become the interpreters, they will distort the truth; they will create a thousand and one mythologies around it, they will create many fictions.”

Your so-called religions are nothing but religious fictions. Just as there are science fictions there are religious fictions. Christianity, Hinduism, Buddhism, Jainism are all creations of the priests – the agents of the Devil.
Mahavira is not the founder of Jainism. In fact, the story is that Mahavira himself never spoke, he remained silent. But there were people who used to speak, and they would say that they were in an inner communion with Mahavira: Mahavira was speaking to them in a subtle language which could not be heard by anybody else except them and they were making it available to the people. These people were called ganadharas, apostles of Mahavira. They created the whole structure of Jainism; Mahavira had nothing to do with it.
I used to know such a man. In this very city, just a few years ago, lived one of the most glorious men who has ever walked on the earth; his name was Meher Baba. For thirty-three years he remained silent; he lived in silence for thirty-three years and died in silence.
But one man, Adi K. Irani, used to tell people what Baba was saying to him, what he was communicating to him in some invisible way. Irani has written all the books which you come across in the name of Meher Baba. Now, this is the priest – and the priests are very crafty.
You are asking me, “Please talk about the Antichrist.” The priest is the Antichrist, the pope is the Antichrist, these thousands of Catholic and Protestant missionaries, these are the Antichrists. The Antichrist has already happened. The first Antichrist was Peter, who founded the church. In fact, far more harm has been done by Peter, the first pope, than by Judas. Judas helped Christ’s work immensely. If Judas had not sold Jesus Christ to his enemies you may not have ever heard his name. It is because of the crucifixion that Jesus became part of human consciousness. Judas was not really his enemy.
In fact, George Gurdjieff used to tell a very beautiful story – of course, his own invention. But people like George Gurdjieff, even if they invent stories, their stories have immense significance. He used to say that Judas did sell Jesus for thirty pieces of silver – only for thirty pieces of silver – to the enemies, on the behest of Jesus Christ himself. It was his order; he told Judas. And of course, being a devoted disciple he could not say no. With tears in his eyes and with a crying heart, he followed the commandment. And it seems a little bit relevant too because when Jesus was crucified all the disciples escaped, they all ran away. Nobody suffered as much as Judas. Judas committed suicide the next day – within twenty-four hours. He could not live without Jesus Christ.
It is a story, but one thing has to be meditated upon – that Judas has not harmed the cause of Jesus, he is not the Antichrist; but the so-called followers, the people who established Christianity, they are the Antichrist.
Fyodor Dostoyevsky, one of the greatest novelists ever to have existed in the world, in his beautiful book, Brothers Karamazov, wrote a parable which has multidimensional meaning…

After eighteen hundred years, one day – a Sunday of course – Jesus thought, “It is now time for me to go back and to see how my people are doing on earth. Eighteen hundred years ago when I was there I was alone, I had to start from scratch. And, of course, the Jews were against me because I was saying things which went against their tradition, their orthodoxy. It was natural that they felt offended and they killed me. Now almost half the earth is Christian – this is the time for me to go. Now they will receive me, welcome me, they will open their hearts to me. Now the right moment has come.”
He chose one Sunday morning, descended into the marketplace in the small town of Bethlehem. People gathered around, villagers started laughing, giggling. They said, “This man looks just like Jesus Christ!”
Jesus said to them, “What are you saying? I don’t look like Jesus Christ, I am Jesus Christ!”
They all laughed and they said, “It would be better if you escaped from here because soon the church service will be over, and once the bishop comes out… If he finds you pretending to be Jesus you will be in trouble, that much we can say.”
Jesus said, “But he is my bishop, he’s doing my work. If you cannot recognize me, at least he will recognize me!” And he waited.
People laughed and joked. They were thinking, “He is a good actor, and doing perfectly well – looks exactly like Jesus.”
Jesus tried to convince them, but they were not ready to listen. Then he waited. The bishop was bound to recognize him. And he was the archbishop. He came out of the church, a crowd of the so-called Christians following him. The moment he saw this young man looking exactly like Jesus, he shouted, “Get down!” – he was standing on a podium under a tree – “Get down immediately!” And he told his people, “Arrest this fellow! This is sacrilegious – somebody pretending to be Jesus – he cannot be forgiven!”
Jesus said, “Don’t you recognize me?”
And the bishop was very angry, and said, “Yes, I recognize you.”
He was chained, imprisoned, taken to the church and thrown into a dark cell. He could not believe what was happening, “My own people…”
In the middle of the night the archbishop came with a candle in his hands, fell down on the earth at the feet of Jesus and said, “I did recognize you, but I could not recognize you in a public place. You would destroy our whole business. Forgive me, and listen to my advice. You are no longer needed – we are doing perfectly well – and if you don’t take my advice, we will have to crucify you again.”
Jesus could not believe his eyes, his ears, what he was seeing, what he was hearing. He said, “You belong to me, you serve me, you pray to me. I have seen you kneeling down before my statue. And now I am here alive in front of you, and you say you have recognized me – and still you don’t want me to appear before the people?”
The archbishop said, “No. I cannot allow you to appear before the people because you are a dangerous fellow. You will again disturb the whole establishment. In eighteen hundred years, with great effort, somehow we have been able to manage. I say to you that even the rabbis of old, when you came the first time, must have recognized you – they were learned people. They must have recognized that you are the only begotten son of God, but they had to crucify you just to save their own skin, otherwise you would have destroyed everything.
“Right now I can see why they had to crucify you. If you don’t listen to my advice, tomorrow morning we will have to crucify you. We cannot allow you to interfere any more. Whatsoever you want to do you can do through us. We are the mediators, people have to reach you through us. You have to reach the people through us. You cannot avoid it, you cannot bypass us.”

This too is a parable. I don’t think Jesus would ever dare to come back again; it is not possible. Once is enough.
You say, “Please talk about the Antichrist, and tell us what it could be.” The priest – and nobody else. There is no Devil other than the priest, and the priest exists in all shapes, all sizes, all forms, all colors – whatsoever you need. Each according to his need, each according to his capacity – and the priest is available to fulfill everybody’s need. The pope, the ayatollah, the shankaracharya – these are different forms of the same phenomenon.
The people who have experienced truth are christs, and the people who are exploiting in the name of their truth are the Antichrists. To me, Christ is not a person. Jesus is a person. Christ only symbolizes the ultimate flowering of one’s consciousness.
In fact, the word christ comes from the Sanskrit word krishna. Krishna has traveled into different countries, and by and by, the moment it reached Aramaic, the language that Jesus spoke, it became christ. Even in one Indian language, Bengali, Krishna is called Christo. And from christo to christ, the word did not have to travel too far.
Christ simply means krishna. Christ simply means the ultimate flowering of consciousness, the one-thousand-petaled lotus opening. Jesus is only one of the christs; there have been many before him. Abraham was one, Moses was one, Lao Tzu was one, Chuang Tzu was one, Zarathustra was one, Krishna was one, Buddha was one. And after Christ there have been many christs – Nanak, Kabir, Al-Hillaj Mansoor, Saint Francis, Eckhart, Ramakrishna, Raman – there is a long line of enlightened people. You can call all of them christs.
In the East we call that state buddhahood, in the West it is called christ consciousness. Christ consciousness means a fully awakened state. Then who is the Antichrist? – the person who is absolutely unconscious. And I have not come across people who are more unconscious than the priests and more dangerous than the priests.
The priest is the ugliest phenomenon on the earth because he exploits your very opportunity to be religious. He gives you a pseudo kind of religion. He is a cheat, he is a hypocrite; he has done every kind of wrong to humanity. Of course he knows the art of doing it, the knack of doing it. He camouflages his acts with beautiful words. He spins and weaves beautiful theories, theologies, but if you go deep inside you will find nothing there – no truth at all, no silence, no love, no godliness.
All religions have been fighting each other tooth and nail, murdering each other, destroying each other – Christians destroying Mohammedans, Mohammedans destroying Hindus, Hindus destroying Buddhists – the whole earth is full of blood in the name of religion. Everybody’s hands are absolutely bloody in the name of beautiful words. The priest talks about love and creates hatred; talks about forgiveness and enrages people, creates anger and violence; talks about godliness, but whatsoever he does serves only the purposes of the Devil. His words are full of light, but his acts are full of darkness. And it needs no argumentation – the whole history is full of it.
Who crucified Jesus Christ? – the Jewish priests, the rabbis. Who crucified al-Hillaj Mansoor? – the Mohammedan imams, the Mohammedan priests. Who made many efforts to kill Gautam the Buddha? – the Hindu brahmins. Many efforts were made to kill him; they could not succeed but that is another matter. Efforts were made to kill Mahavira too – this has been always so. Still today the story is the same; nothing has changed. The priest goes on doing the same stupid act. And people are so conditioned they can’t even see what is being done to them.
You say, “I have always heard it being commented upon with great fear, and yet with no explanation. People don’t know what it is and yet they fear it.” In fact, if you want people to fear something, you have not to give any explanation. Because once something is explained, fear disappears. The moment you know something, fear disappears. Fear exists only with ignorance. Knowing functions like light and dispels darkness. Hence science has helped immensely to destroy fear.
You can see it – look into the Vedas and your so-called great seers, rishis – and remember, I am only calling them so-called because more than that they are not. They are praying to some unknown god, Indra, the god of clouds, lightning and thunder. Whenever there is thunder and lightning, they fall on their knees and start praying to the god Indra because they think that Indra is angry, that’s why there’s lightning, “He wants to destroy us.” The thunder is a threat.
Now nobody is bothered by Indra – nobody is afraid of lightning. Now we know the secret of electricity. Now it is Indra who is sitting inside this fan. And he is doing a thousand and one things: cooking your food, turning your fan – all kinds of things. Who is going to worship Indra sitting inside a fan? Now nobody takes any note of Indra. Indra is as dead as one can be dead.
The seers of the Vedas were very frightened. Ignorance is fear. Hence, no explanation has to be given. Even if some explanation is found, it has to be kept secret. That’s why all religions have tried to ensure that the language of those religions should not be understood by the people, by the ordinary people. The Hindu brahmin has insisted that Sanskrit is the only divine language – devavani – it is the language of the gods. It should not be polluted by ordinary people; only the scholars, the pundits, the knowledgeable people, the priests, should know about it. And of course when they start chanting in Sanskrit, you feel mystified because you don’t understand what they are saying. They may be saying sheer stupid things, just nonsense – abracadabra – but because you can’t understand you feel mystified.
They were very angry with Buddha and Mahavira because they were the two people, in India in particular, who started a totally new tradition, a new beginning because they started talking in the language of the people. The Brahmins could not forgive them; they destroyed their whole mystery. They were creating much noise with their Sanskrit chanting. If you translate it, it’s absolutely meaningless; there is not much in it. Ninety-nine percent of their Sanskrit mantras are just ordinary; it is very rare to find a real diamond.
Buddha spoke the language of the people, he discarded Sanskrit and chose Pali, which was the language of the people. Mahavira chose Prakrit, the language of the people. The same was done by Jesus Christ, and the rabbis were not happy. Hebrew is the divine language and Jesus started speaking in the language of the people, Aramaic. That means you are demystifying. And if people start understanding each and every thing, how will you create fear in them? They have to be kept afraid.
You say, “I have always heard it being commented upon with great fear, and yet with no explanation.” There is no contradiction in it. An explanation cannot be given; any explanation will be dangerous – the fear will be gone.
Science demystifies; hence science makes men stronger.
You say, “People don’t know what it is and yet they fear it.” That’s why they fear it – because they don’t understand what it is. The unknown always makes one afraid.
Secrets have to be kept secret from people if you want to exploit them. Then you have to create much mumbo jumbo, much smoke, so nobody can see what is actually happening. You have to keep people blind, then you can do everything – and they have done everything.
In India, prostitution has existed in the temples in the name of God. And when prostitution exists in the name of God it is not prostitution at all – it is something sacred. You just have to give it a beautiful name. The prostitutes of the temples were called devadasis – servants of God. In fact, they were serving only the priests; they were sexually exploited by the priests and the rich customers who could pay. But this smoke was created that they were serving God, and then prostitution continued in India in the name of religion.
In fact, in many parts of this country it was a tradition, a convention which had to be followed, and people followed it religiously that when one got married, his wife first had to sleep with the god in the temple. The first night, the real honeymoon, had to be with the god. Of course, it was a religious thing! God should initiate the woman into the secrets of love. And the god was nothing but a stone statue – behind the statue was hidden the priest…

Pouring out his troubles to his great and good friend over a couple of triple martinis, Brad had to confess that things were not going too well at home.
“My wife and I just don’t hit it off at night,” he was saying to Bart. “I hate to admit it, but I am afraid I just don’t know how to make her happy.”
“Hell boy,” said Bart, “there is really nothing to it. Let me give you some advice. At bedtime, switch on a new Sinatra recording, turn all the lights low and spray some perfume around the room. Next, tell your wife to get into her sheerest nightie; then make sure you raise the bottom window.”
“Then what do I do?” asked Brad.
“Just whistle.”
“Whistle?”
“That’s right. I will be waiting outside the window. When I hear you whistle, I will come right up and finish the job.”

That’s what the priest was doing hidden behind the god. For thousands of years this continued; in a few places it still continues.
Now, if you give explanations, then everything will be destroyed. Explanations are not to be given; things have to be kept hidden. Things have to be kept in such a way that nobody even suspects what is going on. In the name of religion all kinds of exploitation, oppression, slavery, has happened.
The Antichrist is nothing but your unconscious state. Become conscious and you become christs. Remember, I don’t want any Christians in the world, I don’t want any Hindus in the world. Enough is enough! We are tired of all these people. They have done too much harm, they have wounded humanity immensely. They have made the whole humanity sick. What they have done is nauseating.
They have driven humanity into a state of schizophrenia because they have created guilt. That is their only contribution to the world – guilt. They have created more and more guilt in people because whenever you create guilt, you become powerful. The guilty person starts feeling afraid – fear of punishment – in this life, in the other life, or in the beyond. Then he has to take the help of the priest who knows the secrets: how to bribe God; how to help you pass through; how to help you avoid hell and hellfire; how to arrange for you a beautiful place in paradise so you can enjoy their streams of wine and beautiful young women, apsaras.
The priest does not want you to become conscious. He is against consciousness because consciousness will make you a christ, a buddha, not a Christian, not a Buddhist.
That’s my whole purpose here – my sannyasins are not to be followers, imitators, but independent, conscious human beings. You are not to imitate me, you are not to repeat me, you are not to collect more and more information from me. You have to learn only one thing: how to be more conscious, how to be more an individual, independent, absolutely independent. Freedom is the only taste of real religion. Wherever slavery exists in the name of religion, the Antichrist is at work – and wherever freedom exists, a christ is at work.
You can be a christ, you have the potential, all the potential. Every man is born to be a buddha; if he misses the point it is his own unintelligence. And the most unintelligent thing a person can do is to be conditioned by others. Remain unconditioned. Yes, it is difficult because the child is so helpless he has to follow the parents. But you are not a child forever; a day comes when you become independent. The moment you are independent from your parents, drop all the conditioning that your parents have given to you.
Jesus says one thing which will look very strange to you – and particularly from the mouth of Jesus who says, on the one hand, “Love your enemy just like yourself.” Not only that, he even says, “Love your neighbor just like yourself” – which is even far more difficult. In fact, enemies and neighbors are not different people, they are the same people. It is easier to love your enemy; it is far more difficult to love your neighbor. But Jesus says even that: “Love your neighbor.” This is on the one hand. And the same man says, “Unless you hate your parents, you cannot follow me.” Very strange.
Buddha goes even a step further. He says, “Unless you kill your parents, you cannot follow me.” Now, Buddha is one of the most nonviolent persons in the whole history of humanity, who will not even kill an ant, not even a cockroach, not even a mosquito. And he says, “Unless you kill your parents, you cannot follow me.”
What he means is not to be taken literally. He is saying that unless you drop all the conditionings that your parents have put inside you, unless the mother and the father disappear from your inner world totally, you will not be able to grow, to become mature, you will not be really alive.
Be free from all conditionings and you are capable of being a buddha or a christ.

The second question:
Osho,
Christ and five million Christians carrying their crosses! Buddha and ten million Buddhists carrying their lotus flowers.
One wonders, can we escape the risks of imitation in this amazing game you have created?
Anand Dharmesh, It is impossible to imitate me. I am taking every care that if you try to imitate me you will fall like Humpty Dumpty – and then nobody can put you together, not even me.
It is impossible to imitate me for the simple reason that I am so inconsistent, so self-contradictory, that it is impossible to follow me. In the morning I will say, “Go north!” In the afternoon I will say, “Go south!” By the evening I have changed the whole idea – “Go to the west!” How can you follow me?
Christ can be followed because his message is small and very consistent. Buddha can be followed; he is a very logical thinker. I am absolutely illogical. It is for a certain purpose: it is one of my devices, so that you cannot imitate. You cannot even write a treatise on me; you cannot make any sense of all that I have been saying to you. It is pure nonsense – or, if you allow me to coin a new word, it is pure non-zense!
You have to be on your own, I cannot supply you any philosophy. I have none. Many times people have approached me, that it would be good if I could write a small book just like a Christian catechism, just the essential core of my philosophy. But I said, “I don’t have any philosophy, and there is no essential core to it. You can rely on me only for one thing, that I am not going to give you any philosophy.” It gives me absolute freedom, I don’t have to remember what I said yesterday. I can live in the moment, for the moment. I can say whatsoever comes with no preparation, with no idea. Even I am surprised sometimes. Sometimes I say inside myself, “Man, what are you saying?” I cannot even imitate myself, how can you imitate? It is impossible.

Wayne Edward Innis has asked:
Osho,
You call homosexuality a perversion. That keeps me awake at night and makes me feel like a sick, twisted sinner.
Now, Innis, don’t get unnecessarily disturbed. Homosexuality is not a perversion. It is really a very progressive step. It simply shows the inventiveness of human beings. It shows their multidimensionality. Poor animals are always heterosexual, they don’t know that something else can be done. It shows man’s freedom, he can choose even his sexuality: to be heterosexual or to be homosexual, or to be bisexual, or to be celibate, to go beyond sexuality – all possibilities. You need not be worried.
How are you going to imitate me? One day, certainly, I said that homosexuality is a perversion. Today I change my idea. And it is my own idea, I am absolutely free to change it. I am not responsible to anybody, I am not answerable to anybody. It is just my idea. That moment it was so, this moment it is not so. And I cannot guarantee for tomorrow.
You cannot imitate me, that’s impossible, Anand Dharmesh. Try, and you will find it impossible. I am so illogical. A certain logic is needed to create a following; you have to convince people intellectually that this is the best thing to do. I never convince anybody, I never try to convince you intellectually. Contagious certainly I am, but not convincing.
I am crazy, and only a few crazy people feel attuned with me. What can I do about it? Crazy people are never followers; crazy people are always independent people. In fact, that’s why they are thought to be crazy, eccentric – they are so centered in themselves. Others think they are eccentric because they are not following the mob psychology, the crowd – they always go astray. That’s what the crowd thinks – they are going astray. They are simply going their own way; they are trying to find a new path.
And it is always good to find your own path. Even if you go wrong it is good to follow a new path rather than to be right but on a trodden path. To be on the trodden path, just like on a superhighway, is ugly – it is inhuman, it is destructive of individuality, it destroys your very soul. It is better to go astray. It is better to go into the jungle and get lost, than to follow somebody who pretends to be knowledgeable because one learns by mistakes, one learns by errors. All that I can suggest to you is: never commit the same mistake twice. Find new mistakes, invent new mistakes, and you will be growing, and you will be flowering.
Truth is found only by those who are ready to risk because the only way to truth is via trial and error – there is no other way. There are no superhighways.
But Hindus, Mohammedans, Jainas, Buddhists, Christians, they all believe there are superhighways – not only that there are superhighways, they say, “Ours is the only authentic superhighway – a German autobahn. Others are just muddy tracks.”
You cannot follow me because I am not serious. To create a following you need to be very serious, and I cannot afford that. I could have created a great following, it is so simple – so many gullible fools are available in the whole world, millions of fools are available. You can gather a following very easily. You just have to do a few things: you have to be very serious. That I cannot do; I cannot lose my laughter…

Pope John Paul dies, and he stands in front of heaven’s gate calling Saint Peter, the doorman of paradise.
“Who is there?” asks Saint Peter.
“John Paul.”
“Which John Paul?”
“Why, the pope! Open at once!”
“What do you mean – the pope?”
“Well, your successor – the head of Christianity, you know? Rome – Vaticano?”
Saint Peter starts roaring with laughter. He yells to Christ, “Hey Jesus! Do you remember that silly joke we played on the planet earth people two thousand years ago? Well, they are still into it!”

You cannot follow me. I am saying it is all a joke right now, not after two thousand years; that will be too late!

God was in the habit of receiving each person coming to heaven personally at the gate; but when Osho died and went to heaven, God changed his habit and sent Saint Peter to the gate to receive him.
Saint Peter was puzzled, “Why this sudden change?”
God was very afraid and said, “If I leave my chair free, this guy will run in, sit there, and I shall never get it back again!”

The last question:
Osho,
I am going to Italy tomorrow.
Can you tell me a few jokes so that I can carry them with me to Italy?
I am always ready to tell jokes.

All the girls of the whorehouse went off for the day leaving Gina to watch the business. When they returned in the evening, they asked her how it had been.
“Woww! First-a there came-a the Catholic-a Men’s Choir, then a hockey team-a, then twenty-a lumberjacks. After that-a, it gotta really busy. But-a I ran-a from room-a to room-a and served them all-a!”
“Jesus! You must be really wiped out,” said the others.
“Eh,” said Gina, “my feet-a are really killing me-a from all-a that-a running about!”

Gina Lottabazooma, the shapely Italian screen siren, was put under contract by a Hollywood studio and brought to the U.S. to make an epic Western.
“I absolutely refuse to play this scene,” she exclaimed.
“But, Gina,” explained the director, “all you have to do is point out the direction the outlaws took when the sheriff and his posse ride up to you.”
“I know,” said the star, “but have you read the screen action in the script?”
“What do you mean?”
“Look, how I am supposed to point,” snapped the star. “It says here that I am to place both hands behind my back, take a deep breath, turn north and say, ‘They went thataway’!”

Think over it later on. When you are back in Italy, then think over it. Maybe it takes a little time for you to laugh.
Italians make good jokes for others; they themselves never get the point. It needs a little brain to get a joke. And I have looked in many Italian brains and I find only spaghetti!
Enough for today.

============================================================

The first question:
Osho,
Every time I'm away from my family I feel such a deep and beautiful love for my wife and my children. But when I am with them, lots of conflicts arise and I feel like running away from family, job, tradition, etcetera. But when I'm away I feel that's not it – that's not the answer.
What is going on? Can you tell me what to do?
It is not a question of doing. Whatsoever you do will be wrong because you are not in the right space. You are not right, so how can you do anything right? That is impossible.
It is a question of being, not of doing. Hence, you can move from one prison to another but you cannot be free. You can escape from the world but you will still be miserable – for new reasons of course. You can change your wife, you can change your job, you can change your house, you can change your religion, your church – still you will be the same. All these changes are superficial. They are just like painting your face black, white, red, but deep down nothing is changed, you remain the same.
You have to become more aware. And awareness is not a question of doing: it is a question of being. It is something about your essential core; nothing about your circumference. That’s why this is happening to you – not only to you, it is happening to everybody.
I have known people who have renounced life, renounced the wife, the children, the marketplace, have moved to the Himalayas, to the caves. Sitting in their caves they are still miserable – the same misery. There are no longer the same old causes. But those causes were just excuses, they were not real causes.
The real cause is always within you, and how can you escape from it? Wherever you go, you will be yourself.
Sitting in the Himalayan caves, they are still themselves, utterly miserable. And now they are thinking, “What are we doing here?” Now they have forgotten all the misery of the world, now they remember with nostalgia all the joys of the world. They may not have experienced those joys; they may be just imagining, fantasizing.
Miserable people have the habit – it is inevitable, otherwise it will become impossible to live – to fantasize beautiful things either about the past or about the future. The present is always miserable wherever you are, misery surrounds you. To escape from that misery, at least to forget all about it, the best opium is to think with nostalgia about the past – the wife that you have left behind, the children, the beautiful home, the coziness, the security, the safety. All those sweet things which may not have happened at all; you may have just created them, invented them. Or, if you don’t have much past and you cannot paint anything on the past, then the future is there – a vast canvas. You can always think of a beautiful tomorrow. If yesterday is not worth painting, then you can always paint tomorrow. It is always there.
And this is the way man has been avoiding the present. But to avoid the present is to avoid the real cause of it all.

The new inmate at the mental hospital announced in a loud voice that he was the famous British naval hero, Lord Nelson. This was particularly interesting because the institution already had a Lord Nelson.
The head psychiatrist, after due consideration, decided to put the two men in the same room, feeling that the similarity of their delusions might prompt an adjustment in each that would help in curing them. It was a calculated risk, of course, for the men might react violently to one another; but they were introduced and then left alone, and no disturbance was heard from the room that night.
The next morning the doctor had a talk with his new patient, and was more than pleasantly surprised when he was told, “Doctor, I have been suffering from delusion. I know now that I am not Lord Nelson.”
“That’s wonderful,” said the doctor.
“Yes,” said the patient smiling demurely, “I am Lady Hamilton.”

One can change from being Lord Nelson – one can become Lady Hamilton – but there is no change at all. That’s what people are doing all over the world. They change their religion, they change their wives, their husbands; they change their jobs, they change their outer situations. And again and again they are surprised – nothing changes. The misery persists, it remains the same. In fact, the more they change the outer circumstances, the more they become aware of one thing – the misery is not going to leave, it is going to stay there. Their frustration becomes more settled; their failure becomes their very lifestyle.
You ask me, “Osho, can you tell me what to do?” You have done enough. Now be done with it all; no more doing! Move from doing to being. Become a little more aware. Wherever you are – in the family, with the family, or somewhere else… Wherever you are, become more aware. Try to be now and here. This moment, this silence.
Don’t move from thisness. It will be difficult in the beginning; every small distraction will take you away. A bird starts calling and you get distracted, you cannot just accept it. Immediately you find an excuse – you start thinking what bird it is, and then the whole chain – the sound of the railway train, the traffic noise, anything is enough to take you away from the now. And that is the root cause of misery: to be there and then. The only source of bliss, the only source I say, is to be now and here.
Once you have learned to be present to the present, there is no problem at all. Then your response is total, then your response is from your very innermost core, very fulfilling. Then even living in the family situation with all the conflicts of it, you will remain untouched.
The conflicts will be everywhere. If you go to a monastery, there will be conflicts there – the same struggle, the same competition, the hierarchy – somebody trying to boss; somebody trying to put you the way he wants to put you together. Everywhere you will find manipulation, domination, nagging. Everywhere you will find exploitation of your fear, of your greed. Hence, changing situations is not going to help, it has never helped anybody – but it has been one of the ways of wasting one’s life.
For centuries people created monasteries, people created such monasteries that once you entered the monastery you could not leave. It was for your whole life. People became so afraid of each other – of the wife, of the husband – that there were Catholic monasteries where no woman entered for a thousand years. What fear! The founders of those monasteries must have been really terribly tortured by their wives. Now even an innocent woman who is not your wife is not allowed to enter the monastery. Not only a woman but even a small girl, a six-month-old girl, is not allowed in.
What kind of fear? Are these monks afraid of a six-month-old girl? Are they afraid of the girl or are they afraid of themselves? Are they going to rape the small child, or what? Are they monks or monsters? But fear has dominated them. And there are nuns and their nunneries where no man is allowed to enter. But these people are living in misery.
Here are many ex-monks, ex-nuns, Christian, Hindu, Jaina. They have suffered very much; they had to escape from those prisons. But people coming here also expect some kind of monastery.
Just the other day I was reading an article against me in an Australian magazine. The woman who had come to cover the ashram and its activities was very shocked. She seems to be a very traditional, orthodox woman, interested in Yoga and Hindu spirituality, etcetera. She says, “This is a strange kind of ashram. Nobody has ever heard of anything like this.”
She is offended most by one thing: that people are laughing, dancing, singing – in short, that people are alive. She is very offended that there is a certain “climate of a holiday resort.” She must have looked for a prison, not a holiday resort. What is wrong with the “climate of a holiday resort”? That should be the climate of the whole earth! That should be the very climate of life itself. Life should be a holiday. Only a holiday is a holy day.
And people are working here, people are continuously working – it is not that they are just lazing around. But the climate is certainly one of joy, of laughter. That offends.
The whole article is obsessed with the idea that an ashram has to be ascetic, people have to be there doing yoga postures, standing on their heads, doing all kinds of gymnastics, chanting mantras, doing religious rituals, and being very serious – as if they are just walking corpses. Then she would have been immensely pleased. “This is a religious place,” she would have said, “a spiritual place.”
Reading her article I decided one thing: that the new commune will not be called an ashram – that word is certainly ugly. We will drop it. This is not an ashram. In a way, this is the only ashram because ashram literally means rest, restfulness. But it has become associated with wrong people. We will drop it.
People come with all kinds of ideas. They are miserable in their ideas, but they are still looking for the same ideas. And if they don’t find them, they don’t feel good. They are miserable, and they want everybody else also to be miserable.
One gentleman has just written to me, “Osho, your claim that Swami Vimalkirti attained buddhahood sounds phony.” As if this gentleman knows what buddhahood is!
I was very pleased with his question. I thought, “My God, Gautam Buddha is here who knows what buddhahood is, and what buddhahood is not; who knows the distinction between the authentic buddhahood and the phony buddhahood.” Must be a man far superior to all the buddhas, only then can he judge.
But he must have come with a certain idea. In fact, Hindus were offended by Gautam Buddha’s declaration that he had become enlightened because they had their own idea – just like this gentleman, they had their own idea. In fact, this gentleman will be surprised that Buddha’s five disciples immediately left him, thinking that he had either gone mad or was pretending to be enlightened. His five disciples, who had been worshipping him up to now while he was not a buddha – they were worshipping him as their master. And the moment he declared that he was a buddha – it must have sounded phony – they left him immediately. And what was their argument? Their argument was that he had fallen into the trap of the ego, he had fallen from his ascetic life.
For six years Buddha tortured himself as much as any human being has ever been tortured, and found nothing by that torture. It was the sheer masochistic teachings of the ages that he had been following. But he was an intelligent man – he understood. One full-moon evening, as the moon was rising, he could see the whole stupidity of what he had been doing for six years. Just by torturing your body, how can you become enlightened? What relationship exists between torturing your body, destroying your body, and buddhahood?
That evening he dropped torturing. He told his disciples that now he would live relaxedly, now he would not torture himself, now he would follow the middle path. Up to now he had been doing something extremist. First, he lived the life of a prince, indulged in all kinds of pleasures and luxuries – that was one extreme. Then he moved to another extreme, he renounced the world and all its comforts, luxuries, pleasures, and started torturing himself, started a suicidal course – that was another extreme. He said to his disciples, “Tonight I have come to a tremendous understanding, that truth is not to be found by extremes. I have renounced the world; today I renounce that renunciation too! Now I will be just ordinary, neither a king nor an ascetic.”
The disciples immediately left him, and that very night he became enlightened. He searched for his disciples because he felt they had been with him for so long – for six years continuously – and that it was his duty that he should share his understanding, his bliss, his love, first with those five disciples. When he reached close to those five disciples, they were sitting under a tree, they looked at Buddha coming and they said, “Here comes that fallen man! We should not stand up to pay respect to him; we should not fold our hands in respect to him. We should keep our backs toward him. If he comes and sits, it’s okay; if he wants to say something, it’s okay, but we are not going to pay him any more respect or attention.”
Even Gautam Buddha was not understood by his own disciples.
This gentleman says my assertion that Vimalkirti has attained buddhahood sounds phony. Why? What is wrong with Vimalkirti attaining buddhahood? If I can attain it, why cannot Vimalkirti attain it? Why cannot you attain it?
Buddhahood is not something like a goal far away; it is your very nature. In fact, you are all buddhas, although unaware of the fact. All that happens in attaining buddhahood is that one becomes aware of it. The treasure is there – it is always there, you cannot lose it even if you want to lose it. It is your very being, hence there is no way to drop it. Who will drop it? But you can forget about it. And buddhahood simply means a remembering, a recognition.
Why does it sound phony? If you have some preconceived ideas, if you have some idea how a buddha should be, then certainly it will sound phony.
Jainas in India have not yet accepted Buddha as enlightened. Twenty-five centuries have passed, and I don’t think they will ever accept him as a buddha for the simple reason that they have a certain attitude which is not fulfilled by him. They think that whenever a person becomes a buddha he goes naked, and Buddha never went naked. That’s enough to prove to them that he was not a buddha. When a person becomes a buddha he drops even a begging bowl, he possesses nothing. And Buddha possessed three pieces of clothing, one begging bowl, one walking staff – too many possessions. This won’t do. He’s still living in luxury. According to Jainas, it is still luxury.
Mahavira lived naked, with no begging bowl, with nothing at all. He used to eat from his hands; he used to drink water from his hands. He would lie down on the earth to sleep, the earth underneath and the sky above. Hence he was called a digambara. The word digambara means one who is clothed only with the sky and nothing else. The sky itself is his clothing – nothing else between him and the sky. How can they accept that Buddha has become enlightened?
Hindus cannot accept him. Christians cannot accept that he was a man of the same caliber as Christ because he never did any miracles. A christ is supposed to do miracles, to cure blind people, to make the ill healthy, to raise the dead back to life. How can they accept Buddha as a christ? He never raised any dead.
In fact, a story is worth remembering…

When Lazarus’ sisters asked Christ to come and raise Lazarus from death, he came running. He was far away; it took him four days to reach there. And after four days, he raised Lazarus from his grave. He called forth Lazarus, “Lazarus come out of your grave!” and Lazarus walked out.

A similar story is told about Buddha, but with a totally different dimension to it. A woman’s only son died; her husband had already died. Her name was Kisa Gautami. She went almost mad: her husband was dead, she was living only for this child – and a beautiful child, suddenly died. She carried the body of the son to every physician, every doctor, to every saint, and they all said, “Nothing can be done.” Somebody suggested, “Buddha is in the town. Why don’t you go to him? He says he has become enlightened. If he is really enlightened, he can raise the dead. His touch will do a miracle.”
Kisa Gautami was ecstatic, knowing that Buddha was there: “What was impossible to a buddha?”
She went to Buddha with the dead body of the child. She put the child’s body at Buddha’s feet and said to him, “You can do anything – you are enlightened. Make my child live again. I cannot live without my child.”
Buddha did not do what Christ had done; Buddha did something far more significant. But to understand its significance one needs great clarity.
This gentleman, who says that my assertion that Vimalkirti has attained buddhahood… If he was there – and there is every possibility he must have been there if he is here – he must be an ancient traveler, shopping for spirituality. He must have gone to Buddha, he must have been there and he must have thought, “This man sounds phony.” What Buddha said sounds phony if you compare it with Jesus, and if you don’t have a deep understanding of life and its mysteries.
Buddha said, “Okay, I will revive the child, but you have to fulfill one condition. Go to the town and bring a few mustard seeds from any family. The only condition is that I will only accept mustard seeds from a family in which nobody has ever died. Once you have brought those few mustard seeds, I will immediately bring your son back.”
The woman could not see the point; she was in such a state, almost going mad. She rushed to the town, she knocked on every door. And people said, “We can give you as many mustard seeds as you want” – because in that town they used to grow mustard seeds, that was their main crop. So they said, “We can give you as many mustard seeds as you want, but the condition is unfulfillable. So many people have died in our family – somebody’s father has died, somebody’s mother, somebody’s wife, somebody’s husband, somebody’s grandfather, somebody’s great-grandfather – so many people have died.”
In fact, in any family only a few people are alive, millions have died. If you take into account the whole of the family from Adam and Eve, then millions of your family have died. It is a miracle how so very few are still alive. You are sitting on a huge mountain of corpses: your fathers, grandfathers, great-grandfathers, great-great-great-grandfathers. And underneath it all – poor Adam and Eve. And Friedrich Nietzsche says even God is dead. So underneath Adam and Eve, God the Father. That seems to be the foundation of this whole Everest of death. You are sitting on top of it and not aware at all that soon you will be really part of it. It is only a question of a few moments; any moment you will be part of it. And somebody else will be sitting on top of you – your son, your daughter, your son-in-law, somebody will be sitting on top of you.
The woman, by and by, became aware that the condition was unfulfillable. By the evening she came – she came dancing, she came rejoicing. She fell at Buddha’s feet and she said, “You have done a great miracle! You have made me see something; you have helped me to remember that this life is death.”
Buddha asked her, “Do you want me to revive your child?”
The woman said. “No because he will have to die again. What is the point? Making him die again is ugly. Once is enough, twice will be too much. Rather, I have come for something else now. Help me to know that life which never ends. My son is gone, I will be gone. Before I am gone, I would like to taste something of the eternal.”
Buddha initiated her into sannyas.

Now these two stories, Lazarus’ and Kisa Gautami’s, are in a way parallel. Christ brings Lazarus to life; Buddha gives Kisa Gautami a new insight into life and death itself. To a Christian, Buddha looks phony. To a Buddhist, Jesus looks phony. What is he doing? This is sheer nonsense, because what happened to Lazarus afterward? One day he must have died because we don’t see him around anymore. If he was going to die what was the point of postponing it for a few days, or a few years? Why let him go through that suffering again? – the same wife, the same children, and the same job.
I don’t think Lazarus will be able to forgive Jesus. He was resting in his grave, feeling, “Thank God, all that nightmare is finished. Now my wife cannot nag me anymore, I am out of their reach, I don’t have to go to the office again tomorrow morning.” But Jesus pulled him back. And the Christian fools think this is a miracle.
If I had been in Lazarus’ place, I would have killed Jesus. “What are you doing? Don’t you have any respect for anybody? Dragging somebody back into the turmoil of life? Is it human?”
This gentleman says that my claim is phony. He also says that my criticism of Mother Teresa seems to be the criticism of a very ordinary man. That is true. There I agree. I am certainly a very ordinary man, so ordinary that you cannot even call me phony because a phony person is not ordinary, he’s extraordinary. I am really ordinary. I have no claims. I don’t do any miracles. And, of course, he must have come with the idea that Mother Teresa is doing great work – she is extraordinary, I am ordinary, that’s perfectly true. And I am not in any way interested in becoming extraordinary. To me, any desire to be extraordinary is very ordinary. To be ordinary is the only way of being extraordinary because that is really extraordinary. Nobody wants to be ordinary.
But this gentleman must be as unconscious as you are…

Two buddies had been out drinking for hours when their money finally ran out.
“I have an idea,” croaked Al. “Lesh go over to my housh and borrow shum money from my wife.”
The two of them reeled into Al’s living room, snapped on the light, and lo and behold, there was Al’s wife making love on the sofa to another man. This state of affairs considerably unnerved Al’s friend, but did not seem to affect the husband.
“Shay, dear, you have any money for your ever-lovin’ hushban’?” he asked.
“Yes, yes,” she snapped. “Take my purse from the mantle, and for Pete’s sake turn off those lights!”
Outside they examined the purse and Al proudly announced, “There’s enough here for a pint for you and a pint for me. Pretty good, eh, old buddy?”
“But Al,” protested his friend, somewhat sobered by the spectacle he had just witnessed, “what about that fellow back there with your wife?”
“The hell with him,” replied Al, “let him buy his own pint!”

All that is needed is a little more consciousness. It is not a question of doing something; you need a new kind of being. Right now you are unconscious – you have to be conscious. You have to be more aware, watchful, witnessing.
Witnessing is the key of my sannyas, the master key. I don’t give you any other discipline because giving you a discipline will not help; your unconsciousness will be there, and the discipline will only cover it. You can look like a saint but you will be as unconscious as before. Your saintliness will be as unconscious as your sinfulness was; there will be no qualitative difference in it.
So I am not interested in making saints out of you. I am not interested in helping you to drop your sins either. What I am interested in is to make you aware. The moment you start becoming aware of your actions, your thoughts, your feelings – these are the three dimensions where awareness has to be applied. Walk, but know that you are walking, remain alert of each gesture. Eat, but eat with awareness, don’t just go on stuffing food inside. Think, but witness your thoughts, the process of thoughts, desires, dreams. Feel, but remain a little aware that these feelings, these moods, are not you.
You are only pure awareness and nothing else. You are not the body, nor the mind, nor the heart. You are the fourth, and the fourth is the miracle. Once you have tasted the fourth, then wherever you are – even in hell – you will be in heaven.

The second question:
Osho,
I am a member of a group in Holland called the “Open Lotus,” which is gathered around a medium who claims to transfer messages and energies from Master Morya. This has very much affected my heart and being.
When I am in your audience I feel a kind of melting, but my heart does not as yet seem to be as deeply touched as it is with the medium. What is happening?
Is the experience with the unseen Master Morya unreal and something of the mind? Can it be a hindrance to becoming one with you, Osho? Are you in support of groups like the Open Lotus? If so, do you have a message for them?
Marinus, first, meditate over this story…

Stan and his wife, Rita, were playing the tenth hole. He teed off and Rita hit hers into the woods.
Stan had not hit his ball very far on the fairway, so he went into the woods to help her find it. Suddenly they came across a little fellow about four feet tall with a pointed hat and green suit.
“Hey,” said Stan, “are you a leprechaun?”
“Sure I am,” he replied.
“Well, maybe you could grant my wish to be a scratch golfer.”
“All right, but you have to give up something. If you let me have your wife in the woods for one hour, I will grant your wish.”
“You’ve got it!” said the husband.
The little guy took Rita into the woods and after an hour’s pleasure asked, “How old is your husband?”
“Forty.”
“And he still believes in leprechauns?”

Marinus, how old are you? – and you still believe in Master Morya? You must be feeling great because if something happens according to your belief, it strengthens the ego, it nourishes the ego. Master Morya is not visible, only the medium is there. And the medium is more concerned in impressing you, so she will follow you. In fact, there is no Master Morya anywhere. This whole idea of Master Morya was created by the theosophists. It is an invention of Madame Blavatsky – Madame Blah-blah-blah. It is just fiction.
Madame Blavatsky used to receive letters from Master Morya. In the roof there was a hole, and a servant used to hide on the roof, and all the Marinuses, the theosophists, would sit with closed eyes waiting for Master Morya’s message. And Madame Blah-blah-blah would sway, and she was a really fat lady and very ugly too. Ugly people become religious – what else can they do? I have seen many ugly people, but Madame Blah-blah-blah defeats them all. Only some fictitious entity like Master Morya could love her; no man – no man alive – would be able to gather so much courage.
And she would sway, and she would speak gibberish – what Christians call glossolalia – she would make strange sounds. Much incense would be burned, and much smoke would be created so nobody could see what was happening. And their eyes were full of tears because of the smoke. And then a letter would drop, and all these fools – and they were not uneducated people, all retired magistrates, high court judges, government officials, professors, scholars – they would wait for the letter. Then the letter would be read by Madame Blah-blah-blah.
And great messages were received, but they were all fulfilling their desires. Whatsoever they wanted was fulfilled. They were immensely happy.
It was J. Krishnamurti who destroyed the whole game, who came out of this nonsense and declared, “This is all stupidity.” J. Krishnamurti did a great service to humanity by destroying the theosophical nonsense. But Holland used to be one of the great centers of the theosophical movement, and a few fools still go on living with the hangover.
Certainly you will not feel the same here. In fact, you will feel just the opposite because I am continuously shattering your ego, I am hitting it hard. I am not here to nourish your ego, I am here to destroy it. You can be one with me only if you are totally egoless, otherwise there is no possibility.
If you want to enjoy your ego and your dreams and your fantasies, then these mediums are good. But remember, you will remain childish, you will never grow. Yes, sometimes coincidentally something may appear to be true. If a medium says thousands of things, one thing may coincide with reality. And the fools and the gullible immediately jump upon that one thing, and they make much fuss about it. They think, “If one thing is right then others also must be right. Maybe we are not yet capable enough to understand, maybe we need more purity. We have to become as pure as the medium.”
And what the medium says, you have to interpret, and you always interpret according to your mind. These masters don’t exist at all.

“I have learned one thing about women,” said the experienced one to his drinking companions. “You just can’t trust a girl with brown eyes.”
“It occurs to me,” said one of his inebriated friends, “that I have been married nearly three years and I don’t know what color eyes my wife has.”
The second man finished his drink, climbed from his stool, and hurried home to investigate this disturbing possibility.
His wife was in bed asleep. He crept up to her and carefully lifted an eyelid. “By God! Brown!” he exclaimed.
“How the hell did you know I was here?” said Brown, crawling out from under the bed.

Yes, once in a while some coincidence like that will happen. Beware! All these mediums and all these priests and all these theosophists, theologians are the most cunning people, and they have many brands all around the world. It is better to be with a gambler, with a drunkard; it is better to be with a so-called sinner than to be with these people. These people have been preventing human growth for thousands of years. They are the most criminal people in the world. Their crime is unpardonable.

A genie jumped on his ball and said, “Would you like to be the world’s best golfer?”
“I sure would,” said the man.
“Would you give up your sex life for it?”
“Of course,” said the man.
The genie granted his wish, and in the next twelve months he won every tournament on the pro tour.
After the year was up, the man was back on the eighteenth tee, and once again the genie appeared.
“How did it feel to be the world’s best golfer?”
“Great!” said the man.
“Did you mind giving up your sex life?”
“Not at all.”
“How often did you have sex in former years?”
“Four or five times a year,” replied the man.
“That’s not very much!”
“Well, it is not bad for a priest with a small parish.”

These priests, these rabbis, these ayatollahs, these imams – beware of them. It is time that humanity should get rid of all this stupidity.

Rabbi Goldstein was allowed to join a “restricted” country club. His first day he met Peckham, the president.
“Welcome, Rabbi Goldstein. Would you like to play a round?”
“Sure, we will play a friendly game of a hundred dollars a hole.”
Rabbi Goldstein lost eighteen hundred dollars.
“Look” said Peckham, “I will give you a chance to get even – three thousand, six hundred dollars or nothing.”
Rabbi Goldstein agreed and lost again.
Later in the locker room, Rabbi Goldstein said, “You like to wager. I will bet you one thousand dollars I can pee over your head from ten feet.”
“All right,” said the club prezzy. “But nobody can pee that far.”
Rabbi Goldstein proceeded to pee all over Peckham.
“See,” he said, after changing his clothes. “I knew you could not do it. Come on, I will buy.”
At the bar they met Lockwood, the local bank chairman. “This is Rabbi Goldstein,” said the club president. “He is one of our new members.”
Peckham then told Lockwood about the money he had won, including how Rabbi Goldstein had peed all over him.
“Oh no!” cried the banker, “That son-of-a-bitch bet me twenty thousand dollars he would piss all over the president on his first day at the club!”

Enough for today.

============================================================

The first question:
Osho,
You often advise us to follow two courses of action that seem to be incompatible with each other. First you tell us to be completely in the moment, without mind, to be our fear, our joy, or rage. Then you tell us to become detached from our egos, to watch what comes up within ourselves.
How can we do both? Please explain.
Logic is not necessarily existential, it is intellectual. But existence has no obligation. [Increasingly loud sounds of screeching cats.] You see? Existence goes on its own way. It is not concerned with your question; it is not concerned with my answer. It is absolutely illogical.
Logic will see a contradiction. If logic was all, then certainly there would be difficulty. But logic is not all – it is just the way of the mind, of looking at things. The mind divides into polar opposites; the division is not there in existence itself. Existence is undivided. The day and the night are one, birth and death are one, the plus and the minus are one, the positive and the negative are one. But logically they are incompatibles. Existentially a totally different dimension opens up: they are not contradictory to each other but complementary.
This word has to be pondered over, meditated upon. Life is complementariness. The opposite is not really the opposite – it helps, it supports its own so-called opposite. Without birth there is no possibility of death, and without death there can be no birth either. It is one phenomenon, two sides of the same coin.
Yes, I say that first you should be in the moment, totally one with whatsoever is happening, utterly one – and then watch it. Certainly, if you only think about it, the problem will arise – how can one do both these incompatibles together? If you think then the problem is there, but if you do, the problem disappears. Rather than thinking, try – give it a try.
How it happens is simple: if you are not identified totally with anything, you cannot be disidentified with it totally either. If you are only half-heartedly in it, you can only be half-heartedly out of it. You were never totally in it, how can you be totally out of it? You have to become utterly absorbed in it, and in that very moment you can slip out of it as totally as you had slipped in.
It is as simple as coming into the house and going out of the house. If somebody was just thinking philosophically, then that too would seem incompatible. How to go into the house and come out of the house? These are incompatibles – and you are doing a thousand and one incompatibles every moment.
It is the same breath that goes in and comes out, and you never for a single moment feel worried that something incompatible is happening. To be logical, either take a breath in and don’t allow it to go out – that would be logical – or if it is out, don’t allow it to come in.
Logic is perfectly okay with dead things, with matter. That is the difference between the objective and the subjective world, with matter and with consciousness. Logic is absolutely adequate with the material phenomenon, but absolutely inadequate as far as consciousness is concerned.
Consciousness is a synthesis of polar opposites. Consciousness is where thesis and antithesis meet, mingle, merge and become one. Consciousness is a state of orgasmic oneness where man and woman disappear and become one, where life and death are no longer separate, where they are in such deep accord that you cannot draw a line where life ends, where death begins.
Rather than thinking about it, go into it. What I am saying is something existential, not intellectual. If you just listen to my words and follow them you will be in trouble.
Heraclitus has a tremendously pregnant statement. He says life moves through one opposite to another. Through the opposite, through the tension of the opposite, everything lives and becomes deeper. This is the secret. This is the hidden harmony.
Heraclitus is one of the greatest buddhas of the world. In Western philosophy his name is not part of the mainstream. The mainstream consists of Socrates, Plato, Aristotle, Kant, Hegel, Bertrand Russell, Wittgenstein, Moore. Heraclitus is something of an outsider for the simple reason that he is one of the greatest mystics. What Aristotle only thinks, Heraclitus knows. What Wittgenstein only thinks, Heraclitus experiences.
What I am doing here is not helping you to become great philosophers. My whole approach is anti-philosophical, anti-logical. My approach is existential. You have to experience; except experience, there is no proof of what I am saying. Don’t listen to my words, listen to the intervals. Don’t be too obsessed with what I say, become more and more attuned with my silence. The moments when nothing is said are far more pregnant. My message is not in the words but beyond the words.
But I can understand your difficulty. That is the difficulty of all logical people – and the whole world is trained for logic.
Here we are doing just a totally different thing. We are trying to undo what the society, the college, the university has done to you. They have made you obsessed with language and logic. Language certainly divides things; that’s why truth cannot be said, it can only be showed. I am only indicating the way; I am not really leading you, I am just pointing the way.
Henry Miller has written these beautiful lines:
“The real leader has no need to lead – he is content to point the way. Unless we become our own leaders, content to be what we are in the process of becoming, we shall always be servitors and idolaters.”
I am here just to point the way. Don’t start clinging to my fingers, look at the moon the fingers are pointing at. The fingers are irrelevant.

In an attractive little town just near Los Angeles, a group of the local intellectuals formed a club to study hypnosis, mesmerism, and related sciences of the mind. The club took a definitive place in the social life of the little city and many of the most prominent citizens were invited to join. The studio where the club meetings were held was most attractively decorated and there was a beautiful, big crystal ball suspended from the ceiling in the very center of the room. The leader and teacher had a dynamic personality and he presided over the séances authoritatively and with great dignity.
One recent evening a séance was held, and the members took their seats in the large circle that had been formed as part of the seating arrangement. The lights were dimmed, and the crystal ball automatically began to swing back and forth as the professor mounted his little platform.
“Concentrate on what I am saying,” began the leader. “Do exactly as I tell you to do. Keep your eye on the ball. Think about what I am saying. Follow my instructions faithfully. Do exactly what I tell you to do.”
And then, with a terrific crash, the cord broke and the crystal ball fell and was smashed to pieces.
The leader shouted at the top of his voice, “Ah, shit!”
They say that it took over two weeks to clean up the studio.

Please remember, you are not to follow my words. You are to follow my silences – the pauses between the words, the gaps, the intervals. It is in those intervals that the communion happens, and then you will see the complementariness of the opposites. In those moments you will see there is no master, no disciple. Something totally different takes place – a meeting, a merger: not unity but oneness. And the oneness is not mechanical either; it is organic, it is alive, throbbing.
In the East, we have called these moments satsang, communion. Communion is not communication. This is not a discourse, this is not even a talk – this is just a communion. Words are being used only to create silences, just as one uses a blackboard to write with white chalk on it. The blackboard is not the purpose: the purpose is the white writing. I am using words to create a blackboard so that I can write a few moments of silences on it; that is the purpose.
If you become too much concerned with my words you will get into unnecessary trouble – and you are already in so much trouble. Get out of it.

The second question:
Osho,
Why in the first place did religions develop the idea of celibacy if it is unnatural?
There are many reasons behind it. The most fundamental reason is that man has always found himself the weaker sex compared to woman, as far as sexuality is concerned. His ego is hurt and the male ego is very aggressive. The feminine ego is totally different: it is non-aggressive, it is receptive. Everything in the feminine psychology is receptive and everything in the male psychology is aggressive.
That’s why they complement each other; that’s why they fit with each other; that’s why they miss each other; that’s why they feel only half without the other. That’s why love is possible. Their chemistries, their physiologies, their psychologies, all are complementary – and of course, logically opposites, existentially complementary.
Man is sexually weaker. Any woman can exhaust him very easily, and once a man is exhausted he will take at least twenty-four hours to be sexually potent again. That hurts. The woman is sexually potent twenty-four hours a day; man is potent only once in a while, and the remaining time impotent. For one moment he is potent, then for twenty-four hours impotent; then again for one moment he is potent. His impotence is far greater than his potency, than his power, than his sexuality. That created a deep urge in him to create a certain other kind of power.
Celibacy was just the effort of the male chauvinist ego because through celibacy he thought he could become very powerful. It was through sex that he became impotent. Once his sexuality was released he was at a loss; then he had to wait for time to heal. He became like a wound – empty. And he could see that the woman was never empty, she was always capable. Always comparing with the woman, he discovered celibacy. It was a natural and logical conclusion that if sex makes you impotent then celibacy, obviously, would make you omnipotent. And this is not something primitive, even today the logic is the same.
Even a man like Mahatma Gandhi was continuously concerned with how to become omnipotent through celibacy; he was trying in every way to become powerful through celibacy. He was thinking that if he was really celibate he could defeat the British Empire – through celibacy. If he was really celibate then nobody could kill him.
In his ashram this was a usual phenomenon: somebody would do something wrong – nothing much, but his ideas were too puritanical. Even drinking tea was a sin. Now you can imagine – every man becomes a sinner. If even drinking tea is a sin, it is very difficult to find a saint. The whole ashram was continuously watching each other – who was committing sins. Somebody smoking, somebody drinking tea, somebody falling in love – all were great sins.
And whenever somebody was caught, Mahatma Gandhi would think that it was because his celibacy was not yet perfect – that’s why someone could commit a sin in his ashram. That was his logic. He would not say anything to the person; he would go into self-torture. He would fast to purify himself. He must be impure, that’s why somebody could commit a sin, could drink tea, could smoke, could fall in love with a woman.
When his own secretary fell in love with a woman – that was too much. His own secretary! That simply meant his celibacy, his purity, was not yet up to the point where just his presence would transform people.
And he was continuously thinking in this way. This is really a very egoistic way of thinking – as if everybody has to be dominated by you. You see the inner desire to dominate others in the name of purity, morality, virtue. Now somebody falls in love, and Mahatma Gandhi thinks he is at fault. As if he is the center of the world. As if everything depends on him. As if the whole world has to be according to him. If something is not according to him, it simply proves that his power is not omnipotent yet.
This is the way of a power seeker, although he pretended to be most humble. He tried hard to be simple but if you look deep down, in his simplicity, in his poverty, in his so-called humbleness, you will find nothing but pure ambition to dominate.
When there was a danger that he may be killed by some Hindu fanatic, the government asked him if they could be allowed to protect him. Could some arrangement be made so that he would be continuously guarded and protected?
He said, “No! Absolutely no! If my purity is enough, if my celibacy is true, then nobody can kill me.”
You see the logic – everything depends on his purity. But a brahmin from Pune killed him – his purity was greater! His celibacy seems to be greater; he was far more potent! If Mahatma Gandhi’s logic was correct, then Nathuram Godse, the man who killed him, seems to be more virtuous. And in Pune there are people who worship Nathuram Godse as a mahatma. In fact, he has proved that he is a mahatma – otherwise the bullet would not have killed Mahatma Gandhi. The bullet was able to kill him; that simply proved that he was not yet a real sage.
Now this whole logic is stupid, but it has been there for thousands of years. Man has always thought of becoming powerful through controlling sexual energy – the idea that sex takes your energy out, that it is a leakage; your energy leaks out and leaves you empty. Accumulate energy! This is sheer stupidity. It is absolutely unscientific. It is not that you can accumulate sexual energy – in fact, the more you accumulate it, the less you have it; the more you use it, the more you have it. So if a person goes on making love late in his life he may even be able to make love at the age ninety, ninety-five, a hundred.
In fact, in Russia there are people whose age is about a hundred and twenty, a hundred and thirty, a few people have even come close to a hundred and fifty. And they are all sexually potent, still sexually potent – because Russia is not a religious country. In a religious country like India even young men become impotent. Impotence is something religious; it is a by-product of your religiousness.
I am all for transcendence of sex, but I am not for repressiveness. And I don’t say that by transcending sex you will become powerful, that you will be omnipotent, that everything will happen according to you, that you cannot be killed. This is all sheer bullshit. In fact, you will become more fragile, more flowerlike, more vulnerable. You will be just like a roseflower which can be easily crushed between two rocks – not that rocks are more powerful, but more gross. The roseflower is a higher expression; the higher expression is always fragile, delicate.
You ask me, “Why in the first place did religions develop the idea of celibacy if it is unnatural?” Because it is unnatural: the ego always enjoys everything that is unnatural because the natural cannot fulfill your ego. Everybody is doing the natural; there is nothing exceptional in being natural – it is ordinary.
That’s why I say I am a very ordinary person because I am just natural; I have no pretensions of being special. I am absolutely ordinary because to me that’s how everybody should be. To me that’s what buddhahood is: to be utterly ordinary with no pretensions of being special. To me that is the experience of godliness.
It is not a question of becoming powerful, otherwise it is the same trip. Somebody is becoming powerful through money; somebody else is becoming powerful through politics; somebody else is becoming powerful through celibacy; somebody is becoming powerful through prayer, God-realization, arousal of the kundalini – but the basic desire, the ambition, is to be powerful.
The truly religious person is just ordinary, natural. Celibacy became important because it is unnatural: everything unnatural became important. Fasting is unnatural, standing on your head is unnatural. Everything unnatural became significant because only very few stupid people can manage to do it. Any intelligent person will see the point, why bother standing on your head? If nature had wanted you to stand on your head, nature would have created you that way.
Don’t try to improve upon existence; don’t try to be more intelligent than existence itself. That’s what people are trying to do. If nature wanted you to fast there would have been no need to create the stomach at all. If nature wanted you to be celibate, then you would not have been human beings but amoebas – because as far as I know, nobody is really celibate except amoebas. They are the real brahmacharis. They don’t have any sexual life at all, they reproduce nonsexually. They are great mahatmas!
Maybe all the mahatmas are born as amoebas. Perhaps that’s why in India there are so many amoebas because the life of an amoeba is absolutely nonsexual. Its way of reproduction is really religious!
One amoeba goes on becoming bigger and bigger and then splits into two. It goes on eating, then a point comes when the balloon bursts; then the amoeba becomes two amoebas and then they both start eating and growing. Then they become four, and this is their way of multiplication. That’s why within hours they can produce so many amoebas. They can defeat anybody! Their reproduction is just the limit, the very climax of reproduction. Nobody can surpass them.
And the amoeba is also religious in another way: the amoeba is eternal because when there is no birth there is no death. That’s why it is so difficult to kill amoebas. Our doctors are trying hard, but it is very difficult, almost impossible to kill them, for the simple reason that death is possible only if there has been birth. But they have never been born. In the first place because they are not born you cannot kill them. At the most you can dope them, drug them. Sooner or later they wake up again. Just for a few days you don’t take the medicine and they are again awake. They become buddhas again and again and again! The amoeba has the longest life in the world; it is almost immortal.
Nature has not made you amoebas. Nature has not made you to stand on your head. Nature has not intended you to be celibate. But that’s why the ego takes these forms – the ego enjoys doing something exceptional.

A devout and devoted couple decided to give up sex during Lent. It was a very difficult sacrifice for them to make, but they were successful until Good Friday when they went to the supermarket together to do some household shopping.
When the wife was leaning over a tray of apples, he got a good look at her chest and nearly went mad. A few minutes later he saw her thigh when her dress got entangled in another customer’s pushcart. In the confusion he lost all control of himself, forgetting his vow completely.
A few days after Easter he went to confession and told his priest that he had broken his vow. The father confessor tried to console him by saying that he was sure that after all the days and nights of privation, God and the church would forgive him.
“I am not worried about God and the church,” replied the troubled confessor, “but my wife and I both feel terrible because they won’t let us back in the supermarket!”

That has been the ultimate result of all religious repressiveness: everybody has become utterly guilty in his own eyes. That has helped the priests immensely. If you can make somebody feel guilty he becomes submissive because he becomes afraid. If you can make somebody feel guilty, he is so afraid of punishment that he is bound to follow whatsoever the priest says. Any nonsense, any stupid ritual, and he will be ready to do it just to get rid of the fear.
Religions have exploited fear. And the best way to make people afraid is to tell them to do something unnatural because you can be sure they will not be able to do it. If you tell them to do something natural, you cannot make them feel guilty.
For example in my commune, nobody can feel guilty – it is impossible to feel guilty. I am not creating any guilt in you. My whole effort is to erase all guilt from you so that you can feel at ease with yourself – and the moment you are at ease with yourself, you are beyond the clutches of religious exploitation. Then no church, no temple, no priest, nobody, can exploit you, oppress you. But if you are afraid… And the best way to make you afraid is to tell you to be celibate, and you will not be able. The more you try, the more you will feel a failure, and the more you feel a failure the more guilt-ridden, condemned in your own eyes, you will become.
If you want to create fear in people, tell them to fast, tell them to stop their breath, tell them to stand on their head. Sooner or later they will get tired, and when they stand on their legs they will feel guilty – they are doing something which should not be done.

Flannery was not much of a churchgoer for he played with the same foursome every Sunday. Father Reardan, the parish priest, admonished him.
“Father,” murmured Flannery, “I just want to know if there are any golf courses in heaven.”
“I don’t know,” replied the priest. “I will check with the pope.”
The next day Father Reardan reported to Flannery, “My son, I have got good news and bad news. Here is the good news: there are plenty of courses in heaven, beautiful fairways, greens smooth as silk, and it never gets dark so you can play twenty-four hours a day.”
“That’s wonderful!” exclaimed Flannery. “And what’s the bad news?”
“You’ve got a tee-off time tomorrow morning at nine-fifteen!”

Fear has to be created. Hell creates the fear. Hell has been painted in as many ugly ways as possible just to make you tremble, just to make you ready to fall at the feet of the priest and to listen to whatsoever he is saying, and to believe because only the believers will be saved. Every religion tries to convince you. The Christians say only Christians will be saved and the Hindus say only Hindus will be saved. And those who will not be saved will fall into hell for eternity, into hellfire. And those who will be saved will enjoy all kinds of pleasure.
A strange logic. Here, every pleasure is condemned, and there in heaven every pleasure will be supplied a thousandfold. Here, you have to renounce women and there you will get beautiful women who remain always young, who never become old, who don’t perspire. Here you are told to fast and there you will be supplied with delicious food. Everything that is condemned here will be made available there.
This is an ancient strategy of religions, and sex has been used as the fundamental to exploit, to make human beings tremble, afraid, worried, anxious. This is a way to create anxiety and anguish. And when you are in anguish you have to go to the priest for help; without his help you cannot be saved.

The third question:
Osho,
I always wanted you to give me a sannyas name containing two words – love and bliss – and that's what you really did. My name, Premananda, contains only those two words. You told me Prem means love, Ananda means bliss. How did you manage such miracles?
Premananda, this is not a miracle. You must be something of an esoteric – that is a condemned word here. Get rid of your esoteric-ness. It is just a coincidence, nothing much in it…

A man dropped into a corner bar and ordered a triple martini. “What a coincidence!” announced the bartender. “Just an hour or two ago I was saying that nobody ever orders a triple martini anymore.”
As he was churning up the drink, a nice-looking young woman dashed up to the bar and asked for a triple martini. The bartender and the gentleman customer looked at each other in amazement. They could scarcely wait before beginning their explanation that these happenings really constituted a coincidence and that they had just that minute been discussing it.
“Well,” said the young lady, “I am celebrating a very special event. My husband and I have been married for nine years and we have wanted children very badly. Just today I have learned that I am pregnant.”
Then the man spoke up, explaining that he also was celebrating a very special event. “I have been breeding fancy chickens for years, trying to produce a blue-eyed hen, and just today I have learned that I have been successful.”
“How do you account for your success?” asked the young lady.
He replied most casually, “Just changed cocks.”
“Well,” said the young woman, “that really makes it a coincidence!”

The last question:
Osho,
An Indian author has written, “Osho need not be crucified nor glorified, only ignored.” She seems to have taken this hint from your repeated statements that your critics do the work of propagating your vision.
Osho, what you speak is truth and nothing else but truth. Truth is glorified by those who are able to understand it, or crucified by fools, but can it ever be ignored?
These are the three steps. The first step is to ignore the truth. If that does not succeed, the second step is to crucify it. If even that does not succeed, then the third step is to glorify it.
Jesus was ignored first as just a crazy young man, but they could not ignore him for long because truth cannot be ignored.
You are right – truth cannot be ignored. You can try, but you are bound to fail. Truth is very persistent; truth goes on shattering your lies. How can you ignore it? It goes on pulling the very earth from underneath your feet. How can you ignore it? It goes on sabotaging your very world: your society, your church, your state, all your consolations, securities, safeties – truth goes on cutting them. Truth is a sword and it cuts things mercilessly. You cannot ignore it for long. Yes, in the beginning you can try.
When you can no longer ignore it, then comes the second step – crucify it. But the moment you crucify truth you have accepted defeat. You have accepted that “It cannot be ignored so we have to remove it, we have to destroy it, and we have to kill it.” But truth cannot be killed either; if you kill it, it resurrects.
That’s the whole meaning in the story of Jesus’ resurrection: it is not historical, it is not saying anything about Jesus the person, it is simply talking about the truth that was contained in Jesus. Jesus is only a container, a vehicle. Jesus was crucified – and there is no resurrection of the body, the body dies. The body is part of matter, it cannot resurrect. But truth cannot be killed, truth is eternal. In fact, the day they crucified Jesus, they accepted their defeat.
And whenever you crucify truth, later on you start feeling that you have done something wrong, something utterly wrong. You start feeling guilty – hence Christianity. Then glorification comes in, then you have to compensate. It is the law of simple compensation: you have crucified Jesus, now you feel guilty that you have done something utterly wrong. You have crucified an innocent man for no reason at all. His only crime was that he was telling the truth, his only crime was that he was trying to help you toward the truth – and it is not a crime.
But people realize things only very slowly. They are lazy in recognizing, very lousy in seeing things. They are always late, they always miss the train. When the train has left the platform they come running, but then the platform is empty, the train has left. And they know they could have come a little earlier, they know that it is their responsibility, that they did not recognize – on the contrary, they destroyed. Now they feel guilty and out of guilt they glorify.
You are absolutely right about one thing – truth cannot be ignored – but about its glorification you are not right.
You say, “Truth is glorified by those who are able to understand it.” No. Truth is glorified by the same people who first ignore it, then crucify it, then glorify it. The Christians and the people who crucified Jesus are not different people, remember. They are the same people, exactly the same people – reincarnations of the same fools. First they crucified, now they are glorifying – they are compensating. Of course, the same people will compensate – why should anybody else compensate?
I don’t glorify Jesus. I never ignored him in the first place; I never crucified him in the second place – why should I glorify him? I love him. Glorification is not love, it is compensation. It is just trying to cover up your guilt.
The people who understand love, they don’t glorify. My sannyasins don’t glorify me, they love me. They love me totally, but there is no glorification. Love knows nothing of glorification; it is hate that glorifies. It is a little difficult to understand because ordinarily we think the people who are glorifying Mahavira are the lovers of Mahavira, and the people who are glorifying Buddha are the lovers of Buddha. That is not so. These are the same people who first tried to ignore, then tried to kill, and now they are glorifying.
The people who understood, loved at the first sight. When you see the truth, if you have eyes to see and ears to hear, if you have a heart to feel, you immediately fall in love. It is instant. There is no way of going back. And love is not a glorification. Love is a meeting, a merger, a melting. The disciple becomes one with the master, attuned, in a deep accord. His heart beats in the same rhythm, he breathes in the same rhythm. He forgets who is the master and who is the disciple. The oneness becomes so absolute, how can he glorify? There is no separation. For glorification you have to be separate.
You say, “Truth is glorified by those who are able to understand it…” No. Those who are able to understand it simply love it. And you say, “It is crucified by fools…” That too is not true. It is crucified by learned people, not by fools. It is crucified by the rabbis, by the pundits, by the ayatollahs, by the imams, by the shankaracharyas; it is not crucified by the fools. In fact, the fool is simple, he cannot crucify. The fool is childlike, he is not so cunning – and the fool is not afraid of the truth – why should he crucify? It is the learned person whose learning is at stake, whose scholarship is at risk, whose priesthood is in danger.
Truth is crucified by the knowledgeable, not by the fools. The fools know that they know not, so how they can say what is right and what is wrong? The fool has more potential to understand Jesus than the rabbi.
In fact, you can see it: the twelve apostles of Jesus are all fools in a way – simple people, uneducated, fishermen, woodcutters, farmers, gardeners, simple people. Not a single rabbi. And the people who crucified are all rabbis; the people who crucified are the priests. The highest priest of the temple of the Jews was the cause of crucifixion. The Roman governor-general, Pontius Pilate, was a learned man, very scholarly, well educated. Pontius Pilate and the high priest of the great temple of Jerusalem, these two persons conspired to crucify Jesus. His followers were simple people, very simple people. You can call them fools, they were so innocent.
Truth is loved by those who understand; truth is crucified by those whose vested interests are in difficulty. There are many people who are living on lies. They exploit, they thrive on comfortable lies; they manufacture more and more comfortable lies for people. They supply whatsoever people demand. They are the persons who crucify, and surprisingly, they are the same people – the same rabbis and the same governor-generals – who will finally become the people to worship, to glorify.
It is a strange coincidence that Jesus was killed by a Roman governor, and finally Rome became his citadel, the Vatican became the capital of the Catholic Church. The Romans, the Italians, became the most deeply Catholic – and they were the cause: their forefathers had crucified. It is strange that Rome should become the citadel of Christianity.
And Jews, who had conspired in the crucifixion, they turned into Christians – who else? In the beginning it was the Jews who turned into Christians, then the Romans, and then the disease started spreading; then it became contagious.
Truth cannot be ignored, about that you are absolutely true. And this woman writer who says, “Osho need not be crucified nor glorified, only ignored,” is simply saying, “Start the process.” But it is a strange way of ignoring me – by writing an article. This is real ignorance, authentic ignorance – by writing an article. The article has not yet appeared; I have only seen the advertisement. The article is going to appear in March. These are words from the advertisement.
And the advertisement also says that the article will be well illustrated with colored pictures. Great way of ignoring me! Go on ignoring me this way as much as you can – you are on the right track. Crucifixion will come later on, but first – illustration, colored pictures! I love the idea – a good beginning. And finally it will end, remember, in glorification, and I will not be responsible for it.
If you understand me there is no need to glorify, but then you have to stop the process from the very beginning, you have to destroy the seed. Don’t ignore me, otherwise glorification is bound to happen. It is a logical consequence, it is inevitable.
The woman comes here often. She not only comes, she brings many people – really ignoring me! She is a famous journalist, so she not only brings journalists, she brings very important people, visitors from all over the world. She lives in Mumbai and she is a well-known journalist, so she comes into contact with Western novelists, poets, musicians, other creative people, and she brings them here. This is good.
And she writes also – she has written a few other articles. I say, “With my blessings go on, go on ignoring me!” Of course she must be thinking that she is doing a great job. People have their own understanding…

An old farmer asked a lawyer to help him get a divorce.
“Do you have grounds?” asked the lawyer.
“Sure do, son. I got me five acres up in them hills.”
“Does she beat you up?” asked the lawyer.
“Sure does. She gets up at five and I get up at six.”
The lawyer persisted, “Is she a nagger?”
“Of course not, son. She is a little old white woman.”

This is what goes on between Jesus Christ and the people who ignore him and crucify him and glorify him, and this is what is going on between me and the people who want to ignore me, and will crucify me, and will glorify me.

A Chinese laundryman in Santa Barbara opened a savings account in one of the city’s leading banks and went faithfully every week to deposit his profits.
After some months he had accumulated a very substantial amount so he decided to close the account. He arrived at the bank teller’s window and announced that he wanted to withdraw all his money.
The young teller was taken by surprise so he asked him if something had gone wrong. The Chinaman explained very carefully that he was going to get married and go on his honeymoon.
Then the teller said, “Just take what you need for your immediate requirements.”
When the man insisted on closing the account, the teller summoned the manager who tried to influence the man into changing his mind. He explained to him two or three times that if he took out all his money he would lose the interest. But the laundryman was not to be talked out of his plan and he finally walked out of the bank with all he had on deposit.
A few weeks later the bank manager chanced upon the laundryman in the street. After a most casual greeting the manager asked about the honeymoon and the married life.
The fellow had only this to say: “No good. Honeymoon and married life just like banking: put in, take out, lose interest!”

Enough for today.

============================================================

The first question:
Osho,
What made a loving disciple like Peter, who started from innocence, turn into the cunning first pope and become the founder of Christianity?
Is it possible to lose one's innocence once the love relationship with the master is established?
There are many things to be understood. The first is, the love between the master and the disciple is not a relationship. In a relationship the two remain two; in a relationship the egos are not dissolved. A relationship is simply a relationship between two egos. The love between the master and the disciple is a non-relationship in that sense because there are no egos involved in it, there is nobody to relate.
The master is already a zero, a nothingness, a tremendous emptiness, pure space. The disciple, slowly, slowly coming closer to this nothingness, starts disappearing, evaporating. A moment comes when these two spaces are not two anymore. They have lost their boundaries, just like a dewdrop slipping from a lotus leaf into the lake. Will you call it a relationship between the dewdrop and the lake? It cannot be called a relationship because the dewdrop has become the lake; the lake has become the dewdrop.
One of the great mystics, Kabir, says, “Herat herat hey sakhi, rahya kabir herai. I was searching and searching and searching, and a miracle happened: the searcher disappeared. And that was the moment when there was no seeker, no searcher – that it was found.”
It is a far more profound and pregnant statement than Jesus’ statement, “Seek and ye shall find, ask and it shall be given unto you, knock and the doors shall be thrown open to you.” That is very primary.
Kabir’s statement is, “I was seeking and seeking, but because I was there as a seeker I was not finding it. I was the problem – not that it was far away, not that it was arduous, it was just in front of me. It was all around, it was everywhere, there was no need to seek and search. My eyes were closed by my ego – the seeker itself was the hindrance – that’s why I was not finding it. But a moment came when the seeker evaporated and it was there, in all its beauty and benediction.”
There is another beautiful story about a strange mystic woman, Rabiya al-Adabiya.

Rabiya used to pass through the marketplace every day just to purchase some vegetables, some fruits for herself. Just in the middle of the marketplace was the mosque. She never went in, she never used to visit the mosque; she never participated in any kind of religious ritual. But she always saw a man, who later on became a great friend and disciple of Rabiya – his name was Hassan – praying in front of the mosque every day. A very heartfelt prayer, tears rolling down from his eyes, hands raised toward the sky – and he was calling, just like a lost small child for his mother. He was always saying only one thing, “Open thy doors! How long are you not going to take any note of me? I am crying, I am calling! I am dying without you. I cannot live without you. Open thy doors!” Perhaps he was following Jesus’ advice: “Knock and the doors shall be opened unto you.”
Again and again Rabiya heard this man Hassan crying, weeping, shouting. One day, she came up behind him and hit him on the head. Perhaps Hassan thought that God had come, but what kind of coming? From behind and hitting him on the head? He looked, and this strange woman was there. And he knew about this strange woman – everybody was aware of her strange ways.
She shouted at Hassan and said, “Stop all this nonsense! The doors are always open. But you are a fool. You don’t look at the open doors; you simply go on calling, ‘Open the doors!’ How can he open them when the doors are already open? Just look!”
And it was a transformation. For a moment Hassan was shocked. Sometimes a shock can become an opening because when you are shocked your thinking stops. For a moment he forgot all about his prayer, all his searching. For a moment he was at a loss what to say.
At that very moment Rabiya laughed and said, “Do you see? It is already open! There is no need to cry and call for God to open it. He has never closed it.”
Since then Hassan was not seen at the mosque door. Since then he disappeared in the communion of Rabiya. Finally he became a great mystic, a realized soul, a buddha himself.

Lao Tzu also says, “Seek and ye shall never find it; do not seek and right now you have found it.” Seeking implies the seeker, and the seeker is the ego, and the ego is the only barrier; the ego can never become the bridge.
Hence I say to you, the love that exists between a master and a disciple is not a relationship, it is dissolution of all relationships. It is a totally different phenomenon. It is not part of the world of your so-called relationships: husband and wife, mother and child, brother and sister. You cannot reduce it to any definition, any defined relationship.
It is a very diffused phenomenon: it is like two candles burning in a room, their light will become one. You will not be able to draw a line, you will not be able to separate the two lights, you will not be able to say which light belongs to which candle. And in the love of a master and the disciple there are not even two candles either – the light is there, each light penetrating the other. There are no candles either; it is simply an orgasmic merging of two lights.
Hence, the first thing to be remembered – it is not a relationship, so how can it be established? That word established is ugly. Anything established becomes dead; anything established means now there is no opening, no growth possible; things have settled.
With a true master, things are never settled. There is always a beautiful chaos. The moment the disciple wants to settle, the master immediately unsettles. The master is always on the move – the new commune! And remember, even in the new commune I will go on talking about another new commune – it is not going to stop. We are not going to stop anywhere. So don’t think for even a single moment that once the new commune is established you will be relieved, you will take a deep sigh of relief, “Finally it has happened!” No! With a real master anything final is not possible, nothing happens finally. It is always happening, it goes on happening. It is a constant process. It is not an event, it is a process; it is a movement, so nothing is ever established.
The disciple would like it; hence the question. The desire of the disciple is to come to a settlement, to an established relationship, as soon as possible – but the master cannot allow it. The moment things are settled you are dead, and the communion that transpires between the master and the disciple is always a growth. But our minds work in a totally different way, and what transpires between the disciple and the master is not a mind phenomenon; it is a no-mind phenomenon. The mind always wants establishment.
When Werner Erhard first started his EST, it was E.S.T. – Erhard Seminars Training – that was its name. Soon he found that est has a beautiful meaning; it is a root word, it means is, isness, existence. So he dropped E.S.T. and made it EST. Now I would suggest to him to drop that meaning also. Now it is simply the short form for establishment. It has nothing to do with existence but with establishment.
He has been here. When he comes for the second round I am going to tell him, “Now make it clear that it is just a short form of establishment. Now it is no longer in any way rebellious – it is functioning in the service of the establishment.” Hence the way the EST training happens in California is totally different from the way it happens in Mumbai and Delhi. In Mumbai it happens according to Indian culture, Indian religion, Indian values. If it was to happen exactly like it happens in California, the Hindus would be outraged. This is a compromise.
Any revolutionary cannot be prepared for any compromise whatsoever, whatsoever the consequences. Compromising with each society, with each pattern, simply means you are now more interested in business, less interested in revolution. That is the way of the mind: the mind always hankers for establishment.
The mysterious experience that happens between the master and the disciple is never a mind phenomenon; hence there is no possibility of its ever becoming established. The master won’t allow it. If the master allows it, the master is not a master at all; he is only a teacher of a certain tradition – Hindu, Mohammedan, Christian, Jewish – but he is not a master.
A master belongs to no tradition. A master is basically a rebel. A master is non-compromising. A master is ready to be crucified rather than to be crowned. He will not compromise on any grounds. The teacher simply functions as an agent of the past, and because he functions for the establishment you can have an established relationship with a teacher. With a rabbi, with a priest, with an imam you can have an established relationship, but never with a master.
The master is always pushing you into the unknown; he never leaves you for a single moment to settle in the known. The known has to be constantly renounced for the unknown. And finally, when you have become courageous enough to move from the known to the unknown without the master’s push, on your own accord; then he pushes you from the unknown to the unknowable.
These are the two steps of this eternal pilgrimage – from the known to the unknown, and from the unknown to the unknowable. The moment you take the plunge into the unknowable, you disappear. Then only godliness is. The master is no longer found, the disciple is no longer found, but godliness – just a fragrance, a fragrance which is of the beyond.
You ask, “What made a loving disciple like Peter, who started from innocence, turn into the cunning first pope and become the founder of Christianity?” Now a second thing has to be understood. That is: ignorance and innocence look very similar. And something also overlaps between them, something of a common ground also. The ignorant one has a certain innocence; he is not as cunning as the knowledgeable.
Knowledge is basically cunning. It is an effort to steal the secrets of existence, it is detective work. You are spying on existence; you are trying to find out how to control existence. Knowledge is power in that sense because it makes you capable of knowing certain secrets, and the moment you know the secret you become powerful. Knowledge is basically a power trip. Lord Bacon is right when he says, “Knowledge is power” – the very search is for power.
Hence the ignorant is more innocent than the knowledgeable, but his innocence is going to be lost, it is bound to be lost. It is inevitable that it will be lost because it is unearned. The ignorant person and his innocence are not equivalent to the innocence of a buddha. Each child is born ignorant and innocent, but each child will have to become corrupted, and the greatest corruption happens through knowledge.
Just the other day I was reading an article against me. The writer seems to be a historian and he says, “Osho’s knowledge of history is zero.” That’s absolutely true! Not only is my knowledge of history zero; as far as knowledge is concerned – it may be history, geography, chemistry, physics, and there are at least three hundred and fifty subjects – I am zero about all of them.
Zero is my only possession, my only treasure because to me to be zero is of the uttermost innocence. But it has to be earned. Who cares about your history and all that rubbish? I don’t have any time for all that rubbish. I can make history, why should I know history? For what? I am making history. There are only two types of people: those who make history and those who read history.
I am certainly absolutely ignorant about history. I am ignorant about all directions of knowledge, all dimensions of knowledge. I know only one thing: I am acquainted with my innermost core, but that is not knowledge; that is knowing, that is wisdom, that is buddhahood.
Each child is born ignorant, and of course his ignorance has a certain quality of innocence, but that is natural. He will lose it. He will become interested in a thousand and one things – history and geography and chemistry and physics and mathematics and whatnot. He will become interested. His ignorance also has great curiosity; that curiosity will lead him toward knowledge. He would like to know.
You can see. Each child asks thousands of questions, he goes on asking; you cannot stop his asking. He is very curious, he wants to know because somewhere deep down that longing to be powerful is hidden. He can see his father is powerful because he knows more; the teacher is powerful because he knows more – the people who know more are powerful; the priest is powerful because he knows more. If he wants to be powerful someday he has to accumulate knowledge.
Power corrupts, and absolute power corrupts absolutely; and knowledge gives you great power. The more knowledgeable you become the more power you have. And the child is interested in becoming powerful. He will create power through knowledge, he will create his ego through power – these are natural phenomena – and he will lose his innocence which was part of his ignorance.
There is a totally different kind of innocence which happens only to the awakened ones. Certainly their innocence also has something of ignorance in it. Dionysius calls it “luminous ignorance,” and he is right. You can see it: a knowledgeable person has no luminosity in him. He has gathered many facts, much information; he is well informed, but all that information gathers like dust on him, he is loaded with it. He is a donkey carrying scriptures, great scriptures – the Bible, the Koran, the Talmud, the Gita, the Vedas – but a donkey is a donkey. He can carry beautiful scriptures, but deep down he remains the same.
Knowledge never dispels ignorance, it only covers it up. It gives you a facade, it gives you a mask, it gives you pretensions – knowledgeable people are very pretentious – it makes you hypocrites. But if you dig deep there is ignorance, the same old ignorance, and that ignorance goes on goading you to accumulate more knowledge, more knowledge, more knowledge. There is no end to it – more – because deep down you know there is still ignorance; in fact, it is uncoverable. You can cover it from one side and the other side will remain uncovered, you cover it from that side and you will discover another territory which is still uncovered. Ignorance is as infinite as wisdom, and knowledge is finite. So the finite cannot cover the infinite, only the infinite can dispel the infinite.
You can paint the outside. It will be just like a whitewashed grave – you can put roses on the grave, you can burn candles and incense on the grave, but that does not make the person alive. The dead person inside the grave is still dead. The whitewash on the grave does not help in any way. All knowledge is just a whitewash, ignorance remains intact.
When somebody goes deep into meditation, when somebody moves deeper toward his innermost core, when somebody becomes absolutely silent and aware, then a light explodes inside. It is just like an atomic explosion – not destructive – great creativity is born out of it, great life. Abundant life is born out of it, and then your ignorance becomes luminous.
And when ignorance is luminous, when darkness is luminous, darkness is not there at all. How can darkness be luminous? And when through meditation, awareness, witnessing one’s own being, a person comes to understand, to see, to have eyes, his ignorance is dissolved but his innocence is saved. This is earned innocence.
You cannot lose the earned innocence, but you are bound to lose the unearned. It is part of life’s game that everything you have from nature will be lost and you will have to reclaim it. Only when you reclaim it will it be yours, and it will be yours forever.
You ask me, “What made a loving disciple like Peter, who started from innocence…?” He started from ignorance, not from innocence. Of course, a part of ignorance is innocent, but it is unearned. Peter had not earned it; he was not enlightened, he was not awakened. It is so clear.
Jesus is one of the most unfortunate masters in the whole history of humanity: he could not help any of his disciples to become enlightened. It was not his fault; he was just working in adverse conditions. The Judaic tradition has known prophets, it has never known buddhas, and a buddha and a prophet are basically different. The buddha is rebellious, the prophet is also rebellious, but the prophet’s rebellion is more political than religious, than spiritual. The buddha’s rebellion is spiritual; you cannot call Buddha a prophet.
Judaic tradition, and the two offshoots of Judaic tradition, Christianity and Islam, all have prophets; hence politics remained part of religion. The church was powerful in both ways, spiritually and politically. The high priest of the Jews was powerful in both ways, politically and spiritually. Mohammed, the Mohammedan prophet, fought hundreds of wars his whole life – always with a sword in his hand. You cannot conceive Buddha having a sword in his hand and fighting wars. This is something special to the Judaic tradition: the prophet. Nothing like a prophet has happened in the East. The East has a totally different dimension.
The buddha is only a simple, innocent, silent, peaceful, enlightened being. He shares his being and if people are ready to share, if people are ready to become attuned with his being, they will become enlightened.
Jesus was working in a very adverse condition. He came to the East; he lived in Egypt, in India, in Tibet. For eighteen years he worked in the East, particularly in Buddhist monasteries. His whole message was a synthesis between the Buddhist message and the Judaic tradition, so he was a cross between the prophet and the buddha, and that created trouble.
He spoke the language of the old prophets of the Old Testament; that language was political. For example, “the kingdom of God.” Buddha has never used such an expression, Mahavira has never used such an expression, Lao Tzu has never used such an expression. It was impossible. “The kingdom of God” – it stinks of politics! Jesus had to speak the language that the Jews could understand. He was born a Jew, he lived a Jew, he died a Jew. That was the only language the Jews would have understood – and that was the only language that they misunderstood too. If he had spoken just like a buddha, he would not have been crucified because the Jews would not have bothered much. But once he started talking about the kingdom of God, and “the day of judgment is very near, close at hand,” he created much political fever – unknowingly, or unintentionally.
His message was purely that of Buddha, the message consisted of awareness. He shouted again and again, “Beware!” And remember, the word beware consists of two words: be aware. He said again and again, “Remain awake!” but he had to translate it into Jewish metaphors.
The people who gathered around him had gathered around him thinking that he was a prophet – Peter and others. They had not come to him thinking of him as an enlightened person. There was not even a word for the enlightened person in Aramaic or Hebrew; there is no equivalent word for a buddha in the Judaic tradition. Hence the people came to him thinking of him as one of the prophets declared by the Old Testament who would come one day to deliver them. Now, this is absolutely anti-Buddha, this whole approach.
Buddha says nobody can deliver you. You have created the mess; you have to sort it out. Nobody has created it, so nobody can deliver you either. Your bondage was created by you, so only you can come out of it. Hence his last statement on earth was: “Be a light unto yourself.” This is a totally different dimension: “Be a light unto yourself.” The buddhas only show the way but you have to work upon your being; you have to work hard to discover your innermost core.
But the Jewish tradition was that a prophet comes and delivers you, and they were waiting – they are still waiting. Jesus tried just to become relevant in the Jewish context of “I am the person you have been waiting for.” This is only a device; this is a pure lie – of course pure because a man like Jesus never used anything impure! This is an unadulterated lie, but he had to do it. Otherwise, in the Jewish context there was no possibility of his ever being heard by anybody. He had to say that he belonged to the family of David, that he was the one prophesied by the Old Testament, that “You have been waiting for me.”
This worked in two ways. A few ignorant people gathered around him thinking, “He is the prophet and he has come to deliver us.” Peter belonged to those ignorant few. All the apostles, except one – Judas – were ignorant, uneducated people. Only Judas was a little educated, a little sophisticated; hence he was never as surrendered as the others – obviously. He could find many things wrong in Jesus’ statements; he was knowledgeable. He was trying to improve upon Jesus, he was continuously advising him, “Do this, don’t do that. This is not right, this should not be done, this would be a wrong precedent.”
A woman came – Mary Magdalene came – and poured very precious oil, perfume, on Jesus’ feet. Judas said to Jesus, “Stop this woman! This perfume is so costly that we could feed the whole village for three days. And people are poor – why waste such a precious thing? We could sell it and the poor could be fed.”
Now this looks very relevant and logical, rational – socialist, communist, democratic: serve the poor. But Jesus said, “The poor will always be there, don’t be worried. You can serve them later on. Right now, while the bridegroom is with you, rejoice!”
Judas was not convinced. All the other eleven apostles were convinced, except Judas. Reluctantly he kept silent, but deep down there was doubt. You have to forgive Judas – if you were in his place you would have also doubted. He was the only knowledgeable person; knowledge brings doubts. All the others were ignorant, they were simply faithful.
But this faithfulness was not of luminous ignorance; it was not of enlightened innocence. It was just of those people who don’t know how to argue, how to doubt, who have never used their minds – farmers, fishermen, woodcutters, carpenters – very down-to-earth, but nothing to do with the head; heartful, but as unconscious as those who live in the head.
That is the reason why Peter could turn into a cunning pope, the first pope. He was ignorant but he believed, and whenever an ignorant person becomes a believer he becomes a fanatic. He cannot doubt, he cannot allow anybody else to doubt. He knows only one way and that is belief. He has not experienced: he simply believes that what Jesus says is true, has to be true because it is said by Jesus – “Jesus is the prophet we have been waiting for. He has come to deliver humanity.”
One thing is certain, that humanity is not yet delivered. Two thousand years have passed, the misery is the same, and in fact it has grown far deeper. Man is more miserable than ever, more in anxiety and anguish than ever, feeling more meaningless than ever, standing just on the verge of committing global suicide. Two thousand years have passed, and Jesus was saying, “The kingdom of God is just about to happen.” He was saying, “In our lives you will see the Judgment Day,” and it has not happened yet. Two thousand years have passed.
Those ignorant people believed and the knowledgeable people doubted. Remember, this is how it works: the ignorant believe and the knowledgeable doubt. Doubt and belief are not very different.
When you are innocent – innocent not just like a child but innocent like a sage, innocent through meditation, innocent through a rebirth, a resurrection; innocent because you have reached your center, you are grounded there – then you neither believe nor doubt. Doubt and belief are two sides of the same coin. Doubt comes from the head, belief comes from the heart, but they are two sides of the same coin. One is rational, another is emotional, but both are bondages.
The enlightened person goes beyond both the head and the heart; he reaches his being. He lives from being – he lives from that awareness which is beyond the heart and the head – beyond reason, beyond emotion. His insight is clear, unclouded. He never believes, he never doubts; he simply knows, he understands.
Peter could become the first pope, could become the founder of Christianity because his innocence was not an earned innocence.

The parson of a little church in Mississippi stood before his congregation and asked the head usher to come forward. Holding his nose with displeasure, he gave some instructions, saying, “Please go through the church and see if some stray dog done stole in, stooled, and then stole out again.”
The usher immediately began his inspection, and after some minutes came back to the pulpit and made his report. “No sir, Mr. Parson,” he said, “I don’t see where some stray dog done stole in, stooled, and stole out again. But I does see some very positive signs where some creeping cat crept in, crapped, and crept out again.”

This type of ignorant people had gathered around Jesus – they created Christianity. It is the most ignorant religion on the earth, its whole tradition is ignorant.

A truck driver was trying to change a tire along the side of a busy road. He hammered away with all his might, cursing with each unrewarding blow, until the village parson who was passing that way decided to go to his aid. He finally quieted the driver and proceeded to give him a little lecture about the necessity of offering a prayer instead of curses when confronted with trouble.
Finally the truck driver said that he was willing to try anything just to get the tire off the wheel, so they both kneeled beside the truck and prayed. When the driver went back to work, resuming his hammering with great force, the tire almost leaped off the wheel to the roadside.
The parson, in his amazement, just shouted, “Well, I’m a son of a bitch!”

You can be something just on the surface, and deep down just the opposite of it.
Peter is faithful but utterly ignorant; hence the Christianity that has come into being through Peter and his successors. And now it has reached rock bottom – now a Polack pope! It cannot go further down – there is no further down. Peter has ended up with a Polack pope!
The whole succession of these popes is basically ignorant – not even a single pope has been an enlightened man. Of course they are chosen by votes: it is a political phenomenon. A certain college of bishops chooses the pope. No master has ever been chosen. Who can choose a master? A master has to declare himself; he has to declare himself as the sun declares itself in the morning. The Polack pope! In India we also have Polack popes.
Mahatma Gandhi always had a statue with him on his table. He loved that statue – somebody had presented it to him. It was an ancient Chinese and Japanese symbol: three monkeys. One monkey tightly closing his eyes – the way he is holding his hands and covering his eyes shows very definitively that he wants to see. The very tightness, the forced effort to keep his eyes closed: he is afraid. Just a little opportunity and he will see. The old metaphor is: don’t see anything evil.
But it is a beautiful statue. It is beautiful because it was carved by Taoists, by the followers of Lao Tzu, and they have made it very clear that if you repress something, the deep desire will be to do the opposite. So both are there – the monkey is repressing his desire to see, and yet you can see on his face a tremendous desire to look at what is happening. The other monkey is closing his ears forcibly, not to hear anything evil. The third monkey is forcing his hands upon his mouth not to say anything evil.
When I went to see Mahatma Gandhi’s ashram and I saw this statue, the man who was showing me around, Mahatma Gandhi’s son, Ramdas… I told him – Mahatma Gandhi was dead by that time – I told his son, “One statue is missing. Originally the Taoist statues were four.”
He said, “Nobody said that, nobody ever mentioned it.”
I said “Either the fourth monkey has escaped – every possibility – or Gandhi must have cut off the fourth monkey: it would not suit the Indian context. The fourth monkey was very representative of the Indian mind: he was holding his genitals tightly – repressed – brahmacharya, celibacy.”
After that, when I saw Morarji Desai, I immediately recognized – this is the fourth monkey! I told him, “You are the fourth!” He thought I was talking about the turiya, the fourth state of consciousness. He was very happy. The people who had gone with me to see him could not believe it because I was always joking about him and I was telling him, “You have reached the fourth. You are the fourth.”
He came to see me off outside his bungalow – he was very happy, immensely happy. The moment he left me, the people who had come with me said, “You told him, ‘You are the fourth.’” I then told them the whole story: “This is the fourth monkey! Don’t misunderstand as turiya, the fourth state of consciousness. That has nothing to do with it – this man escaped!”
The fourth monkey is really significant. But if you see the fourth monkey you will see a really religious person – tightly repressing himself in every possible way. Now these four monkeys are not really four: these are four faces of one monkey – one religious monkey. Of course you don’t have eight hands, so they had to make four statues. But a religious person has to do this miracle: he has to keep his eyes closed, ears closed, his mouth closed, his genitals closed – everything closed. He has to live a dead life. This is how the Christians have lived for two thousand years – a repressed life.
In the West, what is happening now is just a movement of the pendulum to the other extreme – indulgence. It is a by-product of Christianity. The people who are responsible are from Peter to the Polack pope. These are the people who have created the whole indulgence of the West. The prostitutes, the Playboys, Hollywood; everything that is ugly in the West, the real founders of it are from Peter to the Polack pope. These are the criminals responsible. It is bound to happen. If you repress something, sooner or later some intelligent generation will revolt against it. And this is a far more intelligent age in that way; man has become more mature.

One Saturday morning at Cape Kennedy, a young mechanic went to the headquarters of one of the scientists to repair a radio. While he was working he spotted a whiskey bottle on a shelf. As he was alone in the room he just reached up and took a big swig out of the bottle. When he had completed his repair job he took another big drink but before he replaced the bottle he decided to see what kind of whiskey he had been so generously snitching.
He examined the bottle carefully and nearly collapsed when he read “Missile Fluid” on the inscribed label. Panic-stricken, he rushed home and called his family doctor on the phone, reporting that he had just drunk missile fluid by mistake.
The doctor was very puzzled by the situation, and after assuring the mechanic that he had never heard of a similar case, advised the fellow to go right to bed and to remain there, but to phone him again promptly if there were any developments.
About an hour later the doctor’s phone rang and the mechanic was on the line. The doctor asked if there had been any repercussions.
“Yes,” said the mechanic, “I farted twice!”
“Don’t bother me with such trivial matters,” cautioned the doctor.
“But, doctor,” said the mechanic, “you don’t understand, I’m calling from Shanghai!”

Fools can believe anything. Now he has drunk something that he thinks is going to create trouble – the missile fluid. Of course, then two farts are enough and you will reach Shanghai!
The people who had gathered around Jesus were very ordinary fools. I am sorry to say that, but what can I do? When I see a fool I have to call him a fool. Jesus was between two kinds of people: on the one side were his followers who were just fools, and on the other side were the rabbis, the knowledgeable. He was crushed between these two.
Jesus has been crucified twice: once by the knowledgeable, the rabbis – and that was of a short duration. And the other crucifixion has continued for two thousand years – now the Polack pope is doing it. It will go on and on. Jesus was misunderstood by the knowledgeable; he was misunderstood by the ignorant. Both can only misunderstand.
Understanding is possible only through meditation, and nothing like meditation has existed in the Judaic tradition, at least not up to the time of Jesus. Only later on, when Hasidism came into existence, meditation started entering the Judaic tradition.
In the time of Mohammed nothing like meditation existed in Mohammedanism, in the Arabic world. It was only later on when the Sufis developed mystery schools that meditation entered there.
Meditation is the contribution of the East to the whole world. Wherever you will find it, it has reached there in some way or other, directly or indirectly, from the East. The West has only known prayer, not meditation at all, and prayer is not transformation. It is only meditation which is the alchemy of inner transformation, which changes your darkness into light, which changes your ignorance into innocence, which changes your whole vision.

The last question:
Osho,
To be serious is not to be alive. There is much pain in me, and a deep laughter is so helpful.
To be serious is not only not to be alive, it is worse than death. Have you ever seen a dead person serious? Impossible! Seriousness is worse than death. Laughter is life, is love, is light. Laughter in its purest form is a dance of all your energies.
In a real deep laughter the mind disappears. It is not a part of mind, or of the heart. When a real laughter happens – a belly laughter, as it is called – then it comes from your very core. From your very center, ripples start spreading toward your circumference. Just as you throw a rock into a silent lake and ripples arise, and they start moving toward the source, in the same way real laughter arises from your center and moves toward your circumference. It is almost like an earthquake. Each single cell of your body, each fiber, dances in tune.
Laughter has never been used as a meditation. I may be the first person who is using laughter as a meditation. Jokes have never been used as part of a spiritual transformation – I may be the first person – but they can be used, they are tremendously refreshing.
You say, “There is much pain in me, and a deep laughter is so helpful.”
Then I will tell you a few jokes!

To celebrate their golden wedding anniversary, a couple decided to go back to the hotel in the Mediterranean area where they had spent their honeymoon. They got the same room that they had occupied, and tried in every way to relive their first great matrimonial experience.
At breakfast the next morning the wife had this to say: “Fifty years ago, when we had finished the wonderful wedding dinner, we came up here to prepare for bed. Being bashful and sort of nervous, you went into the bathroom and undressed. I was terribly excited, and when you came out naked I exclaimed over and over again that you looked exactly like a Greek god. Well, I hate to tell you this, but last night when you came out of the bathroom naked you looked just like a goddamned Greek!”

Morarji Desai dies and goes to hell. The Devil ushers him in, and Morarji is very surprised. Instead of the eternal fires he had always expected there is only a big pool full of shit.
The Devil explains, “The more evil you were on earth, the more you are covered with shit here.”
And, indeed, Morarji looks around and sees many former friends and colleagues. One scene catches his eye: in a far corner there is a short, black-haired man who has a tiny mustache and whose right arm is raised to the sky in salute, and the shit only comes up to his ankles.
Morarji calls to the Devil and asks, “What about this man? He was very evil on earth. Why is he only covered in shit up to his ankles?”
The Devil shouts, “Adolf, when will you learn to stand on your own feet instead of always standing on the pope’s head?”

Enough for today.

============================================================

The first question:
Osho,
A few months ago in the West I read a book by Lama Trungpa, entitled Cutting through Spiritual Materialism, and I got the impression that everything that could be done wrong, I was doing. Then I tried to be more alert, but by avoiding one pitfall I was constantly stepping into another, and so on.
Now my question is: Would you be so kind as to speak about this subject of avoiding spiritual materialism?
I am not for avoiding anything in life – not even materialism. Life has to be transformed, not avoided. If you avoid life, you will remain immature. Life is a great blessing, an opportunity to grow, a challenge; a constant challenge that helps awareness, centering, grounding. Nothing has to be avoided. That is the most ancient stupidity – man has been living under its shadow for so long that it has become almost part of his blood, his bones, his very marrow.
Materialism is perfectly good in its place. If there is matter, matter has to be absorbed in a total life view. It has not to be avoided. It has to be used as a stepping-stone toward spirituality. There is no contradiction between materialism and spiritualism, although it has been said again and again for thousands of years. You have been conditioned so much – the conditioning has gone so deep that nobody ever thinks about it. It is one of the greatest calamities that has happened to humanity.
Matter is the outer side of spirit; spirit is the inner side of matter. They are not separate. The outside and the inside cannot be separate, they are inseparable, they are inevitably together. Hence, a right vision, a total vision of life will be a synthesis, a synchronicity between matter and consciousness.
Materialism has its own beauty, its own significance, just as spiritualism has its own beauty. But don’t make “isms” out of them. Life is one – it is spiritual and material. In fact, to use the word and between spiritual and material is not right, but language comes from the past. It would be better to make one word out of the two: spirit-matter.
They are existing together in perfect harmony. In you they are existing together – your body, your mind, your soul, they are all existing in deep at-one-ment, attunement. There is a subtle rhythm. They are all part of one dance. The body is not against the soul – it is the temple of the soul.
But people like Lama Trungpa go on condemning materialism. And when they condemn, they create guilt in you; you start feeling that whatsoever you are doing is wrong. And the moment you feel that whatsoever you are doing is wrong, you are trapped, you are imprisoned in a dichotomy. If you follow the so-called gurus, lamas, etcetera, you will be constantly in trouble, in conflict because you will be avoiding something which is unavoidable.
If you follow the body, you will feel guilty; if you don’t follow the body, you will feel unnatural. Something in you will remain missing if you don’t follow the body. If you don’t nourish the body, if you don’t respect the body, if you don’t love the body then something in you will remain like a wound, rejected, condemned. And it is part of you. You cannot throw it away, you cannot get rid of it; it is going to be there and it is going to be heavy on you because you have a deep condemnation for it.
Sooner or later the body will take revenge, the matter will take revenge. You have created an enmity, a conflict, an unnecessary struggle within yourself; you have created a deep tension. Hence, the so-called religious people live in immense tension, in immense anxiety and anguish. What is their anguish? – the shoulds and the should-nots.
But Lama Trungpa is not even living according to his own ideology. So you need not be worried. He is one of the people who can be called absolute hypocrites. He condemns materialism, and is a drunkard. Perhaps he thinks alcohol is spirit, is spiritualism. The more you take of it the better!
These fools influence many people because there is a long tradition supporting them. Don’t be a hypocrite. Both are ugly – to feel guilty is bad, it is a state of sickness. But these are the only alternatives your religions leave for you: either feel guilty or be a hypocrite. The cunning ones among you will become hypocrites, and the simple, the innocent ones among you will become guilty. The hypocrites will dominate the simple-hearted; the hypocrites become the priests, the leaders of people. They say one thing and they do exactly the opposite. They have masks, they are hiding behind their masks – they have a double life.
But they are cunning. They are simply befooling you, so there is no problem for them. Their only problem is that they should not be caught. If they are caught, then they are in difficulties. So it is only a question of how cunning they are – the more cunning they are, the safer.
But many of them are bound to be caught, sooner or later. You can deceive a few people for a few days, but you cannot deceive all the people forever. How can you deceive? Somebody is bound to know. Somebody is bound to be aware of your dichotomy, aware of your double standards; that you use a different standard for other people, and a totally different standard for yourself.
You have two doors to your being – the front door is just a facade to receive the innocent ones and to make them feel guilty. And you have a back door too, where you receive totally different people. But those people you receive from the back door are bound to be aware of your duality, of your deceptiveness, of your cunningness.
So the only fear that the priests and the hypocrites and the mahatmas feel is that they may be caught. And they are caught. But the stupidity is such, the unconsciousness of humanity is such, that again and again they are caught, and again and again we go on listening to the same kind of stupidities.
It is time enough that we should get rid of this whole division between matter and spirit. They are not divided anywhere. They are not divided in you – your body and your soul are functioning totally together in deep synchronicity. You can experience it: if your body is sick, your innermost core also becomes sad, and if your innermost core is joyous, your body also wants to dance.
I am not for any escapist attitude; I am not for any split in you. I want you to be one, I want you to be integrated. I want you to be totally natural, accepting, affirming. I teach you a materialist-spiritualist approach to life. It has never been done before – that’s why I am so condemned. I accept it. I don’t feel any trouble with it because it is natural.
There have been materialists in the past: Epicurus in Greece, Charvakas in the East – they believed in materialism. They said: “All spiritualism is hocus-pocus, it is an invention of the crafty priests. It is just to exploit people. And man is nothing but body, there is no soul. So there is no question of knowing thyself, you are just matter.”
That’s what Karl Marx said again in the modern context: “Consciousness is only a by-product, an epiphenomenon – just some matter, some chemicals joined together, created. Once they are no longer together it disappears, it evaporates. Nothing remains after death; there was nothing before birth. Life consists only of birth and death, and in between; so don’t be bothered about the other world, and don’t be bothered about hell and heaven.”
And Karl Marx said, “This is the opium of the people.” Priests have been dope dealers. Perhaps that’s why they are against all kinds of dope – they have their own specific dope to sell. They have to be against LSD, marijuana, hashish. They have to be against all other drugs because if people are taking opium, hashish, marijuana, LSD, who are going to be the Christians and Hindus and Mohammedans? It is a simple question of competition. They had to push their own drugs on the market.
Epicurus, Charvakas, Karl Marx, have a certain truth in what they are saying, but it is a half-truth. The other half has been told by the so-called spiritualists. The other half is that matter is illusory, that it does not exist at all, it is maya; the real existence is of the soul – matter has to be avoided.
What Lama Trungpa is saying is an ancient, very ancient and rotten ideology. He’s a Tibetan, and Tibet is the most primitive country in the world, the most rotten – even more rotten than India. If India is two thousand years rotten, Tibet is five thousand years rotten. It is stinking. He represents that stinking tradition.
These so-called spiritualists have been saying the same thing as the materialists. The materialists say, “The soul does not exist, only matter exists.” The spiritualists say, “Matter does not exist, only the soul exists.” My own observation is that both are right in part, and both are wrong in part. And remember one very fundamental truth: half-truths are far more dangerous than lies because half-truths have a certain truthfulness about them that becomes deceptive, that keeps people deluded.
A lie is a lie – sooner or later you will discover, but a half-truth is very dangerous. You may not go to such depths to discover that it is only half, that the other half is missing.
The West has followed one half – the materialist approach to life. It has created great science and technology. Science and technology is enough proof that matter exists, that the shankaracharya is utterly wrong in saying that matter is illusory. The West has proved finally that matter is there, a reality, and that it has to be understood otherwise we cannot survive. But it is only half of the truth. Even Albert Einstein realized before dying that it is only half of the truth. He knew so much about the universe but he knew nothing about himself. The knower knows nothing about himself. This is a very sad state of affairs.
The East has done the other half. They have proved, certainly they have proved, that the soul is a reality because thousands of mystics have lived in such profound silence, peace, bliss. Their blissfulness, their silence, their tranquility, their unaffectedness in different situations… In life, in death, in success, in failure, they remain absolutely still, unaffected. That shows definitively that there is a center inside you – your interiority – and if it is explored you can attain some transcendence, you can attain the beyond. You can remain calm and quiet in failure, even in death. It is enough proof that the soul exists, that it is not illusory, as the materialists say.
But the other part is missing, and the East has remained poor, starving. Its outside is ugly. It has found some inner secrets, but its outside is sick, its outside is almost not worth living. It has committed suicide on the outside, just as the West has committed suicide on the inside.
The West has enough technology, enough science, enough affluence, enough money, but something of the inner is missing. There is no peace, no silence, no joy, no bliss, no meditativeness, no experience of godliness. It is time we should see that up to now humanity has lived dividedly.
A new human being is needed on the earth: a new human being who accepts both, who is scientific and mystic; who is all for matter and all for the spirit. Only then will we be able to create a humanity which is rich on both sides. If it is possible to be rich on both sides, why choose poverty in any way – the outer poverty or the inner poverty?
I teach you richness: richness of the body, richness of the soul, richness of this world and that world. Both are possible, there is no problem at all. What I am saying I am living, and I don’t see there is any conflict. I can be as meditative in my Rolls Royce – in fact, more meditative – than in a bullock cart! I have been in a bullock cart, I have been on a camel. I have used all kinds of vehicles – and to be meditative on a camel is really difficult. Camels don’t like meditation at all, they are very non-meditative animals – and in a bullock cart on an Indian road…
I don’t see any point in dividing the outer and the inner. I have been poor, I have lived in utter poverty, I have lived in richness. And believe me, richness is far better than poverty. I am a man of very simple interests – I am utterly satisfied with the best of anything, I don’t ask for more!
Don’t be unnecessarily tortured by these people like Lama Trungpa.

Abe cornered Rabbi Levin behind a bunker at the fourteenth green. “I caught you kissing my wife last night,” said Abe. “I know you are the playboy of the country club, and it is about time somebody taught you a lesson. That kiss will cost you ten dollars.”
“Ah, all right,” said Rabbi Levin. “Here is a hundred.”
“A hundred dollars?” exclaimed Abe.
“Sure,” smiled Rabbi Levin. “The rest is for what you did not catch me doing!”

“Come over for a couple of beers, Rabbi Levin?”
“Cannot today. MacDowell is playing in the club tournament.”
Next week: “Come over for a few beers, Rabbi?”
“Can’t make it this week either. MacDowell won at the club and is playing in the All-Island.”
The following week: “How about some beers today, Rabbi?”
“No good. MacDowell has moved up to the State open.”
“Hey Rabbi, your game used to be soccer. How come this sudden interest in golf, always watching MacDowell?”
“I don’t watch MacDowell. Whenever he plays, I screw his wife!”

Beware of all these lamas and rabbis and Ayatollah Khomeiniacs – beware! These are the people who have caused so much misery for humanity that it is incalculable. Either they have created cunningness or they have created guilt, and both are ill states. One should neither be cunning nor guilty. In fact, both are related to each other, they have a deep connection.
The people who create guilt are bound to be cunning. They are cunning, that’s why they create guilt. Once they have created guilt in you, you can be exploited, you are vulnerable. It is to exploit you that they create guilt. We have to put a full stop to all this nonsense. Enough is enough.
Be simple, be natural, be spontaneous. Follow your own light. Don’t be bothered by others – shoulds and should-nots. That’s the freedom a sannyasin has to live.
My sannyasins have not to be cunning, and they have not to be guilty either. The moment you are free of guilt and cunningness, you have the door of the divine open for you. You are welcomed by existence itself. To me that is true religiousness.

The second question:
Osho,
I wonder if I am falling asleep more and more?
It is impossible here to fall asleep more and more. In fact, when you come here you are already as asleep as you can be – you come here snoring. You cannot fall asleep more than that; there is a limit to everything.

Talbot was teeing off at the golf club. As he swung he did something funny with his left thumb, and the drive went slicing off into the trees and out onto a nearby freeway. The ball smashed through the windshield of a bus, blinding the driver. The bus struck a truck filled with chickens, causing both vehicles to tumble into a deep ditch.
Talbot rushed to the scene and soon a state policeman arrived. “Hey,” he exclaimed. “Can you tell me what happened?”
“Well,” replied the golfer, “I think I did something funny – like this – with my left thumb.”

That, he thinks, is the cause of the whole thing that has happened: he did something funny with his left thumb. It is not the cause. It may have triggered a process in many sleepy people moving around. And why did he do that funny something with his left thumb? He himself could not explain it – he would shrug his shoulders, he would say, “I don’t know.”
You are not aware at all of what you are doing. You are simply living some unconscious instincts…

The big-mouthed frog went to a photographer to have his photo taken. The photographer put the frog on a stool and adjusted his camera. Then he discovered that the frog’s mouth was too wide for the camera frame. The photographer suggested that the frog should go home, purse his lips, and repeat the word pussy for several days in order to make his gaping mouth narrower.
A week later the frog returned. The photographer adjusted his camera and then shouted, “Now say the word!”
Losing all control, the frog cried, “Cat!”

It is not very different with a man either…

In a county courthouse in upper Vermont, a youth went on trial charged with raping the daughter of one of the local families. The victim, who was being questioned in the witness chair, was very shy, and the judge was trying very hard to be patient with her as he asked the necessary questions. Most of the time she just hung her head in embarrassment and refused to reply.
At last, the judge, obviously losing patience with her, said, “You must tell the court exactly what happened. Did he insert his organ into you?”
Finally she raised her head and rather timidly whispered, “Well, your honor, it looked more like a flute.”

You are not falling more asleep. What is really happening is just the opposite: you are becoming aware of your sleepiness, you are becoming aware how deeply asleep you are. That is something of immense importance – becoming aware of one’s own sleepiness, of one’s own unconsciousness. This is the beginning of the day, the dawn; then the night is already over.
The moment you start becoming aware how asleep you are, something new has happened, something in you has already become awakened. The one who is aware of sleepiness is not asleep. That part in you – of course it is yet a very small part, a very small fragment of you – but that’s enough. That will function like a catalytic agent; it will transform many more things in you. It will go on widening, it will go on becoming bigger and bigger.
It is like a seed: it contains buddhahood in it.
Of course, when you see a seed you cannot see the flowers which are hidden in it. But the seed contains the whole potential – the tree, the branches, the leaves, the foliage, the flowers, the fruits. A single seed can make the whole earth green. Or why say the whole earth? It can make the whole universe green because a single seed can create millions of seeds, and then each single seed can go on creating millions of seeds.
The first seed has happened in you. Rejoice! You are not falling asleep; you are becoming aware of your sleepiness. You were not aware before – and of course, when one becomes aware, it hurts. When one becomes aware of how unconscious one is, one has always been, one feels very sad, one feels in great turmoil. One cannot believe, “This is the way I have existed up to now!” One feels absurd, ridiculous.
But you are looking at the wrong side, at the negative side. You are simply looking at the sleepiness that has surrounded you up to now. You are not looking at the small candle of light that has started growing in you, which is becoming aware of the surrounding night, of the darkness all around. That small flame will function as a seed. Help it to grow. Become more aware of your sleepiness. That’s the only way to go beyond it. That is the only way to disperse it; that is the only way to transform it.
The day is not far away, the night is over. The day has to come. And it is the moment of transmission, the moment of transformation. If you look back, it is all night – and of course, you can only look back because that is what your mind contains, your past memories. You cannot look ahead, you cannot understand what is going to happen the next moment, but I can see it. That’s the function of the master: to help the disciple to remain aware not only of the past, but of the future possibility.
The disciple can only see the past; the master can also see the future. The disciple can see only one’s stupidity; the master can also see your buddhahood, your “awakenedness.” It is a moment of transformation, a transitory period, a bridge. Don’t look back. Forget the whole night, and the darkness, and the sleepiness. You are finished with it – finished in a way that the first ray of light has come in. It is because of that ray of light that you are becoming aware of your sleep, of your darkness. Now help – pour all your energy into that ray of light. Make it as powerful as possible. Concentratedly become one with it. Get rooted in it. Risk everything for its growth. And then the day is not far away – it is very close by, it is just round the corner.

The third question:
Osho,
What is the difference between a sannyasin and a virgin?
A sannyasin stays a sannyasin.

The fourth question:
Osho,
What is the difference between pleasure and bliss?
The difference is immense. It is not only of quantity and degree: it is a qualitative difference.
Pleasure is dependent on something outside you. Because it is dependent on something or on somebody, it brings bondage. Bliss is your intrinsic nature, your flowering, your one-thousand-petaled lotus opening; it is your own fragrance. Because it is your own, it brings freedom.
Pleasure always imprisons you, and bliss always liberates you.

A young girl arrived home about four o’clock in the morning and awakened her mother to tell her this sad story:
“I met a charming young fellow in a bar, and after a few rounds of drinks he took me to his apartment where we had some more drinks. Finally I passed out cold. Then while I was completely unconscious he raped me!”
“What a pity,” murmured the mother in a most consoling tone. “You missed the best part!”

As the family was gathering for the evening meal, the father, the head of the house, asked his eighteen-year-old son what kind of a day he had had.
“Wonderful,” answered the youth. “I met a couple of very good-looking girls in the park, and made love to both of them, very satisfactorily.”
Then the youth asked his father if he had had a good day.
“My day was fine also,” came the reply. “I turned a couple of good deals in the stock market and I am very pleased with the results.”
Then they both turned to grandpa and asked him how he had passed the day.
Grandpa, beaming with delight, announced, “My day was absolutely tremendous – my bowels moved twice!”

Pleasure – it depends… Bliss is independent.
A child may have pleasure with toys, a young man may have different toys, an old man still different toys. But bliss is the same whether a child attains it, or a young man or an old man. It is our eternity. Pleasure is momentary, temporal: bliss is eternal, timeless. Bliss is part of our immortal being.
I am not against pleasure. There is nothing wrong for a child to have pleasure with toys, and there is nothing wrong for an old man to have tremendous pleasure when his bowels move twice. Perfectly good! But if your life consists only of toys and bowel movements, then it is not much of a life. Something more is needed and that something more cannot be found on the outside. You have to dig within. That’s what meditation is all about.

The fifth question:
Osho,
Can silence be heard and understood?
Only silence can be heard and understood. Words can be heard, but only superficially – and can be understood, but only intellectually. Silence is heard existentially and is understood from your innermost being. It is a total understanding.
I can see why you have asked the question because ordinarily we understand only words. We are prepared to understand only words, not silence. We are educated to understand language and all its complexities. Nobody helps us to go beyond language, to go beyond words, to reach the wordless space within us.
The society is against it because if you can hear silence you will not be part of the crowd mind, of the collective mind – you will become an individual immediately. And an individual is a danger to the state, to the church, to the society. An individual is always dangerous because an individual is nothing but rebellion. His very presence is a risk for all the vested interests, for the establishment. The establishment wants you to be obedient: it wants you to understand orders. The establishment wants you to be slaves, servants – efficient, of course, but not too intelligent; just intellectual, not intelligent.
Silence is the explosion of intelligence. Silence means: inside you, you are just spaciousness, uncluttered spaciousness. Silence means you have put aside the whole furniture of the mind – the thoughts, the desires, the memories, the fantasies, the dreams – you have pushed all aside. You are just looking into existence directly, immediately. You are in contact with existence without anything in between you and existence. That is silence.
To be in tune with existence even for a single moment is enough to make you aware of many things. One is that you are deathless, and the person who is deathless cannot be forced to be a slave. He would rather like to die than to become a slave. He would rather like to risk everything than to risk his freedom because death means nothing to him.

When Socrates was given the opportunity that he could choose either death or to remain alive but not to preach his message to the people… If he remained alive, he could remain alive only on one condition: that he would not talk about his truth. Socrates laughed and rejected the whole thing immediately. He said, “There is no need for me to be alive then. If I cannot say my truth, if I cannot live my truth, if I cannot convey my message, what is the need for me to live? Then I would rather choose death.”
The magistrate was surprised, he could not believe… He said, “You need not answer right now. You can have time, you can think it over. Don’t be in such a hurry! Life is precious – how can you be so easily ready to die?”
Socrates said, “There are only two possibilities. If I die, these are the two possibilities: either I die completely or only the body is left behind and something of my essential core still lives. Both are perfectly good. If I die completely, there is nobody left to be afraid, to suffer, to be miserable. So why should I be afraid if I die completely as the materialists say? Perhaps they are right. But then there is no fear because I will not be here, so who is there to be afraid?
Or, the second alternative is as the spiritualists say: that I will not die – then why be worried about death? Only the nonessential will be gone, the essential will still be alive. It is worth risking the non-essential for the truth.”

Socrates was a very rational being; hence he gave these two alternatives. He knew perfectly well that he would not die, but his expression was always rational. His expression was not mystic, his expression was philosophical. Of course the magistrate had to agree with him. These were the only two alternatives: either you die or you don’t die. In both ways Socrates was right.
My own feeling is that Socrates knew perfectly well that he was not going to die. It is impossible that he should not have known – such a tremendous intelligence, such an individuality, such purity, such penetrating insight – it is not possible that he would not have known the non-temporal, the timeless.
The moment you understand that you are eternal, all fear disappears. Society exists through exploiting your fear; hence it teaches you from the school to the university, it devotes almost one-third of your life in learning words, language, logic. It is not concerned at all that you should understand silence. That’s the function of a master: to undo all that society has done to you, to help you to go beyond words.
You can experience it happening here – you can hear the silence – and when you hear it, there is immediate understanding. Understanding comes like a shadow following silence.
To understand words and to hear words is very simple. Anybody can do it; just a little education about language is needed, nothing much. But a tremendous transformation is needed to hear silence and to understand silence. Silence is the basic requirement for understanding existence, the basic requirement to know truth.

Father Ryan and Anderson, one of his parishioners, were playing a friendly round together. The priest had been having trouble all day. At the seventeenth hole, his ball fell into a deep sand trap. Several times he whacked away; sand flew, but each time the ball rolled back into the hazard.
Still silent, but with his lips compressed and his eyes burning with frustration, Father Ryan stared at the ball for a long time.
“Father,” said Anderson, “that’s the most profane silence I have ever heard.”

Silence can be profane too. Silence can be sacred too. Silence has as many nuances, as many dimensions as your being has. It is multidimensional and it is tremendously pregnant.
Being here with me, being a sannyasin, can be defined very simply as learning to be silent – sitting in silence with me. I am using so many words for the simple reason that words can give you gaps. I can simply sit here; one day I am going to do that. I will be just sitting with you.
It is really a torture for me to talk. I would like as quickly as possible just to sit silently with you. But if you are not ready to understand it, you will fall asleep: you will start dreaming, you will start dozing away. You will not be able to understand it.
My words keep you awake, and just between the words I give you gaps. Those are the real, essential things. Waiting for another word, you have to listen to silence. I tell you one joke, that wakes you up, then just searching for another joke… Not that I have to search for it – I know where it is. And it does not matter much, any joke will do – I can manage. But just searching for another joke, you are awaiting breathlessly, utterly silent. Even though sometimes Monkeyjibhai Desai comes with his colleagues on the roof and they start doing their thing. But you are not distracted; in fact, those monkeys help you to become more silent, more alert, so that you cannot miss any word that I am going to say to you.
This situation is being used to hand over to you a few pieces of silence. It will look very strange to the newcomers that I am talking just to make you able to hear silence and to understand silence. But that has always been the way of the buddhas.
The day you are ready… And slowly, slowly many people are getting ready. The day is not far away when I will have enough people ready – a certain quantity is needed. Just as at a certain temperature, a hundred degrees, water evaporates, there is a certain quantity which is needed for silence. And when so many people are here, then anybody who wants to fall asleep when I am sitting silently will not be able to fall asleep either. The silence all around will go on goading him to keep alert. The silence all around will not in any way allow him to fall asleep. Silence has its own tremendous force, its own power.
I am waiting for the right quantity – and people are coming. The moment I see that my commune has enough silent people and I can sit silently – and the newcomers will be transformed by the silent people; just sitting among them will be enough for them to have a taste, they will be drowned in your silence – then there will be no need for me to talk at all.
A few people have fallen asleep. For them…

The sweet young thing was telling her mother about the great time she had at the mountain resort.
“I met a man in the recreation hall and we played ping-pong all afternoon,” she said. “What fun, mother!”
“Why, dear,” said the mother, “I never knew you enjoyed ping-pong.”
“I do now,” the daughter said. “I would hit the ball the wrong way, and we would both go under the table after it. Then he would hit the ball the wrong way, and we would both go after it under the table. We played all afternoon. It was wonderful!”
“But I don’t understand,” said the mother “where does the fun come in?”
“Under the table, silly!”

Finley was flipped over golf. It became his only topic of conversation. Mrs. Finley was slowly going bananas with the constant discussion of birdies, drivers and sand traps, of his golf clubs, his caddies and his scores.
Finally, at dinner, she snapped, “I am tired of you talking about golf twenty-four hours a day! I don’t want to hear about it at this meal!”
“But what about… What shall I talk about then?”
“About anything,” said his wife. “Talk about sex for goodness’ sake!”
“Okay,” said Finley, “I wonder who my caddie is screwing these days?”

The two old maids lived their lonely lives together until, rather unexpectedly, a stranger arrived on the scene and whisked one of them away in matrimony.
After the honeymoon, the new bride visited her unmarried friend and painted an ecstatic picture of married life.
“Our honeymoon,” she said, “was like a cruise down the Mediterranean, a sail into a glorious sunset. It was wonderful!”
The second old maid was very much impressed and determined to get a man for herself. She showed her bank book around town and eventually nailed a local gigolo. They were married at once and began their honeymoon.
They climbed into their wedding bed, and in a short time the husband was flushed with excitement. The bride, however, was cool as a cucumber and decidedly unaffected by the proceedings.
“I simply don’t understand it,” she said rather indignantly. “My friend told me that marriage was like a cruise down the Mediterranean, like a sail into glorious sunset.”
“Oh, she did, eh?” said the guy, now trembling with uncontrollable excitement, “Well, bon voyage, baby – I’m sailing without you!”

Enough for today.

============================================================

The first question:
Osho,
The latest from the pope: “Defending the human dignity of the poor and their hope for a human future is not a luxury for the church, nor is it a strategy of opportunism, nor a means of currying favor with the masses. It is her duty…”
Anything to say about this most recent statement from the bejeweled and bedecked pontiff?
All the religions have been saying “service to the poor” for centuries, yet poverty goes on increasing. Poverty has not disappeared, the so-called golden future has not arrived, and they have been talking about it for at least ten thousand years. There must be something fundamentally wrong – they don’t really want the poor to disappear from the earth.
They talk about the dignity of the poor, but what dignity can there be in poverty? Poverty is the most humiliating experience in life. It is the root cause of all crimes. It reduces human beings to a state of animality, or even worse. It takes away their humanity and makes them commodities in the marketplace, purchasable, saleable. But beautiful words: “dignity of the poor.” Nobody is going to argue against them except a crazy man like me.
We have heard enough of this nonsense. In the name of “the dignity of the poor,” poverty has to be saved; poverty has to be protected. Whenever you want to protect something ugly, you have to give it a beautiful name. And people live by words. People are so stupid that they become too concerned about words rather than the reality hidden behind them.
There is a cow in the Himalayas, a wild cow, called “the blue cow.” In nineteen fifty-two, the number of blue cows became so high that they started destroying crops. It became a problem, and it had to be solved immediately. The Indian Parliament discussed the matter. They wanted to shoot the blue cows, to kill them because that was the only way. But to kill a cow in India would create bigger problems than it would solve. The cow is the holy mother to the Indians; you cannot kill a cow. So they did a small trick: they didn’t call it a “blue cow,” they called it a “blue horse”! They killed thousands of blue cows – but they were not killing cows, they were killing “blue horses.” Of course it was the blue cow which was killed, but on paper it was the “blue horse.” Nobody bothered about the blue cows at all. There was no protest from the Hindus, who are always ready, who are waiting for such opportunities.
You cannot kill a monkey because monkeys represent Hanuman, the monkey god. You cannot kill an elephant because elephants represent another god, the god Ganesha. You cannot kill a cow – but blue horses? Who cares about blue horses! Nobody is concerned. The problem was solved just by changing the word. Such is the stupidity of humanity.
The poor have to be saved, the misery has to be saved, the suffering has to be saved – for the simple reason that without the poor, the miserable, and the suffering humanity, there is no future for the church. Not only the Catholic Church – no future for any church, Hindu, Mohammedan, Jaina, Buddhist. They have all been living; they have all been in great demand, for the simple reason that people are suffering. And suffering humanity needs consolation, comforts. The present is so ugly that they need hopes for the future. The hopes of the future are nothing but opium for the people. I agree with Karl Marx, I cannot agree with the Polack pope.
The future helps in a way to tolerate the present. It is almost intolerable, it is so inhuman that if hope for the future were taken away, there would be immediate revolution in the world, there would be rebellion everywhere. The establishment would be overthrown within days; the status quo would no longer be there.
The politicians and the priests are in a subtle conspiracy. The politician would not exist if people were not in misery – when they are in misery, they need leaders. When somebody is blind, he needs to be led. When you have your own eyes, you don’t need leaders. When somebody is utterly blissful herenow, who cares about your silly paradise and heaven? Who bothers? This very moment is paradise enough – this very body the buddha, and this very space the lotus paradise. But if the present is ugly, if the present is like an open wound, full of pus… If the present hurts too much, then you need painkillers.
The future is a painkiller: tomorrow everything is going to be okay. It is only a question of today. You have tolerated so much, just a little more, just a little more… And it is always today that comes, it is never tomorrow. Tomorrow always looms there near the horizon. The distance between you and tomorrow remains constantly the same, but it keeps you running, changing, chasing, dreaming, fantasizing about the future.
What the pope says has to be very deeply pondered over. It is the essence of all religious exploitation up to now; this is the history of all that has happened in the name of religion. It has nothing to do with true religiousness. It is absolutely irreligious. It is a political game; hence meditate over each statement.
First, he says, “Defending the human dignity of the poor…” How can you defend the dignity of the poor? There is no other way than by destroying poverty. There is no other way – categorically I say, there is no other way – than to destroy poverty itself. Only when people are not poor do they start feeling that they are worthy. They can have a life of pleasures, happiness, joy; they can rejoice in the beauty and the blessings of nature. But when their stomachs are empty, how can you defend their dignity?
It is a well-known fact that mothers have sold their children for just a few rupees because they were hungry for so many days. Now, to think of a mother selling her child – maybe to a butcher – just for five rupees, just to feed herself for one day: what more indignity can there be? But you cannot blame the mother.
Parents have been known to murder their children for the simple reason that they cannot feed them. It happens every day. Almost every day in India, in some corner or other, girls are sold for prostitution by their own parents – of course with great sadness, with tears in their eyes and in their hearts, crying and weeping. But what else to do? There seems to be no way out.
Every day I read in the newspapers: families first throw their children into a well or into the ocean, then they jump themselves. They destroy the children first, then the mother, then the father himself. Or they take poison and go to sleep.
How can you save the dignity of the poor? Why not destroy poverty?
Nobody says, “Save the dignity of the rich!” That would bring the whole point to a focus that would bring you to a clear-cut perception. No pope, no shankaracharya, no ayatollah says, “We are trying to save the dignity of the rich.” Everybody would laugh. There is no need to save the dignity of the rich. Why is there a need to save the dignity of the poor?
It is poverty that is making their life subhuman. Why not destroy poverty? Now we have the means and the methods to destroy the poverty. It is now within our hands, within our capacity. We can forgive the past and forget all about it because I can see it was impossible for Jesus to destroy poverty. It was impossible for Buddha to destroy poverty because there were no scientific methods available, no technology, no industry. They had to find some rationalization for the poor.
Buddha found rationalization in past lives: you are poor because you have done wrong in past lives. That suits, it makes it reasonable. If you have done so many sins in the past, who is going to suffer? You sow the seeds then you have to reap the crop. Nobody else is going to suffer for you; nobody can suffer on your behalf.
It looks logical. Buddha can be forgiven because there was no other way. The poverty was there, with no possibility to destroy it – at least some consolation, some comfort could be given. If it is from the past, you have a certain rationale for it. And you have the hope also, that if you don’t commit the same kind of things now, in future either you will be born rich, a prince, a princess; or if you are really virtuous you may not need to be born at all, you will live in paradise for eternity.
But today, these popes cannot be forgiven at all because science has provided all the technology that can destroy the poverty as quickly as you can imagine. If it is not being destroyed, the reason is the vested interests of the past don’t want it to be destroyed. They live on it; they are parasites. They are exploiting people and their suffering, so they still go on repeating the same mantras, chanting the same mantras.
Hindus go on saying, Buddhists and Jainas go on saying, “Poverty is because of your past bad karmas.” And Mohammedans, Christians and Jews go on thinking it is because Adam and Eve committed a crime – so you are suffering. Adam and Eve disobeyed God and because you are just part of the same continuum you have to suffer for it.
Today this whole thing is just rubbish. Neither have your past lives anything to do with your poverty, nor has Adam and Eve’s disobedience anything to do with your poverty. Your poverty is there because of our own stupidity now; it has nothing to do with the past. That excuse is escapist, and if it has something to do with the past, then naturally you have to hope for the future. The present is the only reality. Between the past and the future you will be crushed and destroyed – and that has been the case up to now.
These are the people who are trying to save the dignity of the poor, and at the same time they go on helping more and more people to be born on the earth. The pope, on the one hand, is against the use of contraceptives, against the very idea of abortion, against birth control methods. Now this is how poverty is created. Remember, rich people don’t produce many children. Have you ever pondered over the fact, why? Why rich countries are concerned that their population is decreasing? France is concerned because its population is decreasing; Sweden is concerned, too concerned, that its population is decreasing. A great fear that if rich countries go on decreasing in their population, and the poor countries go on increasing in population, sooner or later they will overrun the whole world. Just the sheer fact of their numbers will be enough to overpower, to possess all the rich countries.
Now, it is a very strange world: the rich countries are concerned with how to increase their population, and the poor countries are worried how to decrease their population. Are we living at the same time, or in different worlds, in different centuries? We are not contemporaries; our problems are totally different.
Why do poor people produce more children? The reason is very simple – and the simple and the obvious is always overlooked – the rich person has many other things for his entertainment, and the poor man has only sex; nothing else for his entertainment because everything else costs something. You go to a movie… The poor man earns so little that just going to a movie and all his earnings of the day will be gone. Then how is he going to manage himself and his family? He cannot drink alcohol, he cannot become a Rotarian, a Lion, he cannot afford all these new entertainments. He cannot even have a radio or a TV – he cannot sit before the idiot box, glued to the chair for six hours, otherwise who is going to earn the bread and butter?
After the day’s work, tired, humiliated, tortured, he comes home. The only relaxation, the only entertainment that he knows of that is freely available to him, is sex. Hence poor people produce more children.
Rich people have diversions; sometimes they become so interested in other things that sex becomes secondary. You can find rich people so interested in other things. Somebody may be interested in paintings, collecting paintings; or he may himself be a painter; or may be immensely interested in music; or may be a composer himself; or may be interested in dancing.
There are possibilities – and he can always live his sexual life too, in a vicarious way. My own observation is that when you are seeing sex on the TV screen, you are living it in a vicarious way. You become identified with the man or the woman, whatsoever may be the case. When the man is making love to the woman, deep down in your fantasies you are making love to the woman. It is satisfying in a way. Your cerebral sex is satisfied. Remember, the sex center does not exist in your genitals; the sex center exists in your brain, it is cerebral.
Now there are scientists like Delgado who say that we can put electrodes in the brain, and you can carry a small box, like a matchbox, inside your pocket, with a remote control – so even the wire will not be shown, there will be no wire. You can just put your hand in your pocket, push the button and you will have an orgasm. It will be non-genital. It will not have anything to do with your genitals, and it will be far more satisfying because you will not have to depend on the other person.
And there are many problems when you have to depend on the other person. It is a rare coincidence that the man can satisfy the woman or the woman can satisfy the man. There are discrepancies. Nature is not such a perfect master as you think. The male genital organ is small compared to the female genital tunnel – one inch less. Just in a small city like Pune there is a difference of miles! That difference is unbridgeable.
Their timing is different; the woman will take a longer time to come to an orgasmic peak. For centuries she has been pretending – just to buttress the ego of the male chauvinist pig because he enjoys tremendously that he has given a beautiful orgasm to the woman. So she has been pretending. That’s why it is more satisfying with a prostitute because she knows how to pretend, she is an expert in pretending. She will scream in joy, sing songs in joy, and you will think what a great man you are: look what you have done! She is all bliss – and she is only pretending; you have paid for it. And she will be pretending the same thing after you with somebody else. It is all pretension.
But that’s actually the case with wives too. They have been pretending for centuries. To bring the woman to orgasm, a certain training is needed that is lacking; a certain discipline is needed on the part of the man.
So when you depend on the other there are many problems. If your pleasure is dependent on the other, there is a bondage attached to it too, there is a certain imprisonment. And there is jealousy and there is suspicion, and all kinds of ugly things enter from the back door.
Delgado’s device can be of tremendous help to make men and women free of each other. But I don’t think the Polack pope will agree with it because sex for pleasure is sin, and Delgado’s device will make it absolutely for pleasure.
Sex is right only for a reproductive purpose – that is the religious idea: if you produce children then sex is right. If you are just having fun, you are committing a crime against God because sex is sacred, and fun is not sacred. Now, who has decided that fun is not sacred? I say to you: fun is more sacred than reproducing in an overcrowded world.
But these popes and these priests are all for reproduction, and then they want to save the dignity of the poor. They create poverty!
Mahatma Gandhi was doing the same in India. His whole life he thought he was raising the dignity of the poor, but he was simply changing the name. He was calling the poor, “the children of God.” By calling them “the children of God” nothing was changed – they remained the same poor people. Yes, their egos felt a little flattered. But that is not going to help at all; that is going to create more problems. They will be hungry, they will be ugly, and they will be egoists also. You have added a new dimension to their problems, which were already too complex.
He was also against birth control, he was also against the pill, he was also against any contraceptives. Go on creating children! And moreover, he was against all science, all technology. You will be surprised to know that he was against the railway trains, he was against telephones, he was against all kinds of industries. He was even against things as innocent as the telegraph, the post office. He was against anything invented by man. Man has to go back to nature. Back to nature simply means that there will be even more poor people in the world than there are now because even the rich will become poor, even the middle-class people will fall back into poverty. It will be a huge ocean of poverty. Yes, in a way people will feel good – “We are all equal” – because poverty will be distributed equally. But that is not raising the dignity of the poor.
The only way to raise the dignity of the poor is to destroy poverty. It can be done – now we have all the means and methods to do it. Even communism is not needed at all. In fact, communism has not been able to destroy poverty, in Russia or China or anywhere else. It has simply destroyed the rich people. In fact, the communism that exists in the world is not communism at all: it is only state capitalism. The ownership has changed. Now there is no longer private ownership; instead of private owners the state has become the only owner.
Now this is even worse because when there is only one owner, when there is a monopoly of everything – it is a state monopoly – then there is no freedom possible. Not only is the dignity of the poor not saved or defended, even the dignity of human beings is lost. Dignity as such is lost.
Now Soviet Russia and China are huge concentration camps and nothing else – no freedom of expression, no freedom of thought, no freedom at all. You have to function just like machines; you have to produce more and more for the state, for the great state. And there is a bureaucracy, the Communist bureaucracy, which has replaced the capitalists.
There is no need for communism to destroy poverty; science can do it very easily because a single machine can do the work of thousands of people. But it is not being allowed because it goes against the vested interests, and those interests are pouring their money into the churches.
Who has made the pope “…the bejeweled and bedecked pontiff?” Who has made the Vatican the richest religion in the world, the richest church in the world? From where has all that money come? It is bribery. It is the rich people who go on bribing the church, and the church goes on preaching things which look very religious but are basically political and economical, and are against all revolutions.
The only revolution that can free humanity from poverty is a scientific revolution. In fact, if machines are introduced more and more… [At this moment the electricity fails, so does the sound system.] You see, the Holy Ghost seems to be angry! It must be the work of the Holy Ghost – his representative on the earth is being criticized.
If machines can replace man more and more, within two decades, just within two decades, the whole of humanity can be freed from the indignity of a mechanical life. A laborer working in a factory has become almost a machine. He goes on doing the same thing day in, day out; year in, year out; for thirty years, forty years. Maybe it is just one small repetitious thing. That repetition for forty years necessarily destroys his intelligence. It becomes mechanical.
If machines can do all this work – and they can do – then man is freed; then man can do all those things that he had always wanted to do, but there was no time and no opportunity. He can sing songs, he can dance, he can play, he can meditate, he can pray, he can rest, he can relax, he can be creative, he can paint, sculpt. He can do thousands of things which everybody deep down wants to do but cannot do because there is no opportunity.
The genius of man is in a state of dormancy, stagnant. Because he cannot fulfill the needs of the body, the needs of his soul remain unfulfilled. There is a hierarchy of needs, remember. First you have to fulfill the bodily needs; that is the very foundation of your life. Then you have to fulfill your psychological needs. And only then, and remember, I repeat, only then can you fulfill your spiritual needs.
The poor person struggles first with his basic needs. He cannot be interested in poetry, in music, in painting. How can he be really interested in meditation?
People go on asking me again and again, almost every day there is a question: “Why are people from all over the world coming to you and yet Indians are ignoring you?” They are not ignoring me – their basic needs are not fulfilled; there is a gap between them and me. They are searching for bread and I am talking about meditation. I cannot give them bread, I cannot give them shelter, and if I suggest to them how they can get the shelter and the bread, their whole conditioning goes against it. They will not listen to me.
If I suggest that birth control is needed, the pill is needed… Because to me, the pill is one of the greatest things that has happened after the bullock cart; it is one of the most revolutionary things. There have been only three revolutionary things in the history of man. First was fire, second was the bullock cart, and third is the pill. Their conditioning goes against it if I suggest to them, “Do this, and poverty can be destroyed.”
They are not interested in meditation, they cannot be. Their basic needs are destroying them. They don’t have the opportunity, or the energy, or the time, or the intelligence, to be interested in meditation. First, the basic needs have to be fulfilled and then the psychological needs.
This is my constant observation: if a person comes to me for the wrong reasons, he is bound to be angry at me because I will not be fulfilling his needs. I receive hundreds of letters from South Africa – all the letters are concerned… Somebody is suffering from a ghost, somebody has been put under a spell, somebody is afraid of a black magician – so they need me to protect them and send them a mantra which can save their life. Now, I cannot do all this nonsense.
When Indians write to me, they always write about money. They want money – they want their sons to go to the colleges, to the universities. Somebody writes: Can you send my son to Oxford or to Cambridge? All their needs are basically physiological. They are not the people who can be interested in meditation. They cannot look at the stars – their eyes are focused on the earth, their necks are paralyzed; they have lost all the power to see that which is beautiful. Even if they look at the moon they will think of a chapati! It is natural because we project our own needs; everything becomes just a screen for our projection.
When some visitors, Indians, come here, and after the lecture I go around Buddha Hall, I can see they are not looking at me; they are looking at the Rolls Royce. They are nudging each other, “Look!” They are not interested in me, their whole obsession is the Rolls Royce. That’s why I am keeping it – at least something for them to enjoy.
I see even educated Indians… But even educated Indians are not basically fulfilled. Their sexual lives are starved, their nourishment is not enough. Their body is not as it should be; something is missing. When they come here and I enter Buddha Hall, and with folded hands I welcome you, only those few Indians don’t answer – as if their hands are paralyzed. They cannot even fold their hands just to welcome me – and I am welcoming them. It is not that they have to take the initiative, I am taking the initiative. But they cannot even do that. They look so ugly. They can see, all around, thousands of people, with love, with gratitude, folding their hands – and folding their hands in love and gratitude. And respect and surrender should be more natural to the Indians; it is their way of greeting. But they cannot even greet me, as if something prevents them; like a thick iron wall between them and me.
What is the wall? The wall is that I don’t exist here to fulfill their needs. I am, in a way, irrelevant to their context. Somewhere, deep down, the distance is so great that even a greeting is impossible. They look embarrassed. They can see what they are doing, but they are somehow paralyzed, as if it is impossible for them to just welcome me. If they cannot even fold their hands, do you think they will be able to allow me into their innermost core? That’s impossible.
The basic needs have to be fulfilled first. Science can do that. The psychological needs then have to be taken care of – art, aesthetics, can do that. Only then does religion enter. Religion is the greatest luxury in the world because it is the peak, the virgin peak of Everest, the snow which has not been trodden by anybody. To reach it you will have to move from the valleys where you are living. It is a long pilgrimage. Only when somebody reaches the peak of Everest, to the peak of consciousness, is there dignity. The poor cannot have any dignity. The poverty will prevent the dignity from happening.
Hence, I say, the pope is absolutely wrong, saying, “Defending the human dignity of the poor and their hope for a human future…” Yes, he is trying to save their hope because if they can go on hoping, then the church can hope to exist. Their hope is basically the hope for the future popes. But I don’t think it is going to happen. In fact, there is an ancient prophecy of Nostradamus that the last pope will have his name starting with a W. And this Polack pope has his name starting with W. I think this is the end!
I don’t believe in prophecies, but sometimes miracles happen. This is the first pope in the long succession of popes whose name begins with W. This may be the last, and rejoice if the prophecy is fulfilled!
The only hope for the church – Hindu, Mohammedan, Christian, Buddhist – is that humanity should remain poor; then they need opium. Otherwise, who wants opium? When do you want to drink alcohol? – when you are miserable, when you want to drown your misery in something, when you want to forget it all; when you want to have a little rest from your worries, anxieties, anguishes. That’s what religion has been doing in the past.
Religion is nothing but a drug, a very subtle drug. But if people are really happy, rejoicing in life, living with intensity and passion, like flowers and birds, and rivers and mountains and stars, who will need these fools around? Who will go to the Vatican, or to the Kaaba, or to Kashi? Who will listen to all kinds of nonsense?
There is no hope for religion as it has existed up to now. Yes, there will be a totally different kind of religiousness if man becomes happy. That’s what I am trying to make clear to you: what kind of religiousness is possible if humanity becomes happy. Then it will not be a religion of renouncing.
Buddha says, “There are four truths: first, life is misery; second, there is a method to end the misery; third, you can do the method, you can go through the process, it is not impossible, it is possible for all human beings; and fourth, there is a state beyond misery.”
Now, if there is no misery, Buddha’s first truth is canceled. And once you cancel the first truth, what is the need of the second? If there is no misery, what is the need of a method to end the misery? The whole house topples down. And it is not only Buddha’s house. He’s simply making it clear what others have said only in a very implied way. He is a very rational man, so he is saying it exactly, precisely, in a scientific way. But this is what all other religions have been doing.
Their basic assumption is that life is misery. If this is the basic assumption, then renunciation is, of course, the method to get out of it – renounce life, escape to the monasteries, to the deserts, to the Himalayas. If life is misery, then escapism is religion. I am teaching you here that life is not misery. If I am true, then escapism loses all significance, all meaning, all relevance. Then there is no point in renouncing life. If life is bliss… And that’s what I say again and again – life is bliss, ultimate bliss, life is ecstasy. Rejoice! There is no question of renouncing it.
This is going to be the future religiousness. And remember my distinction: I am not calling it the future religion, I am calling it the future religiousness – because religion will give you the idea that it will be Christian, Hindu, Mohammedan; a creed, a dogma. No! Religiousness: a diffused kind of fragrance surrounding the earth, with people rejoicing, dancing, singing; people rejoicing so much that a tremendous gratitude arises in their being, a gratitude for the unknown energy that has given them birth, for the unknown source from where they have come, and to where they have to return one day; for the unknown whole which has made all these benedictions possible. Only then does man have dignity. It is not a question of dignity for the poor or for the rich: human beings will have dignity.
In fact, the so-called religions have made man feel very undignified. They have created guilt; they have condemned all that is natural in you, all that is spontaneous in you. They have praised the unnatural and condemned the natural. They have made everybody feel like they are crawling on the earth like an ugly worm – crawling on the earth in the mud. While my effort here is to remind you that you have wings, that you are a bird, that you can soar toward the stars, that the whole sky is yours, that even the sky is not the limit. Only then does man have dignity.
It is not a question of poor or rich, black or white, man or woman. Man as such has dignity only when life has dignity, when life is joy, when life has the flavor of ecstasy, adventure, exploration.
He says: “Defending the human dignity of the poor and their hope for a human future is not a luxury for the church…” That I know. It is not a luxury for the church: it is its very basic need. Without it, it cannot exist; without it, it will not have even a single moment to live. It is not a luxury, it is its very breath. With that I will agree with the Polack pope. I can rarely agree with him, but on a few points I can agree.
He says, “…nor is it a strategy of opportunism, nor a means for currying favor with the masses. It is her duty.” Nobody had asked him… Why is he saying that this is not a strategy of opportunism? Somewhere in his unconscious he knows it is because he was sermonizing on his own. I have read the whole sermon that you have asked about. Just the other day I was reading the whole sermon. Nobody had asked him, nobody had raised the question. He was talking on his own, he was opening his own heart. Deep down he suspects that it is a strategy of opportunism.
Sigmund Freud says even a slip of the tongue has some unconscious roots behind it. If suddenly somebody stands up and says, “I am not a thief! Who says I am a thief? I am not a thief!” Then what will it show? It will simply show, “Give him to the police! Why is he shouting that he is not a thief?” There must be something in him which has erupted in spite of himself. Why is he defending, saying that he and his church are not opportunistic? It is. It has always been.
For example, the whole history of the church – and not only his church, of all churches – is ample proof that they have been opportunistic, always opportunistic. They fit in with the status quo – whosoever is in power, they serve the master. They are just like dogs: the moment they feel that the master has changed, they change their attitude also, they start wagging their tail before the new master.
He says that it is not a strategy of opportunism. Then what is it? He made this statement in the Philippines, one of the poorest countries in the world. When he was in America he did not make such a statement. When he was traveling in the Western, rich, affluent societies, he was not making such statements. Now in Karachi, in the Philippines, in the East where poverty is everywhere, why is he making such a statement? It is opportunistic, it is meant for “…currying favor with the masses.”
The masses are so stupid that they immediately fall in line with anybody who praises them. Those praises are just hot air, but the masses feel very good. Immediately the masses are with the person who praises them. This is an ancient trick of the politicians and the priests. They have changed thousands of times; for example: in Galileo’s time, the Catholic Church and the Catholic pope decided that Galileo should take back his statement that the earth goes around the sun because the Catholic Church had believed for hundreds of years that it is just vice versa – the sun goes around the earth.
Religious people are very afraid that if even a single statement proves to be wrong in their scripture, then all other statements become suspicious. It is a natural conclusion. If Jesus can make a statement which is absolutely false, unscientific, then what is the guarantee that other statements are true? If he does not even know whether the earth goes around the sun or the sun goes around the earth, what he knows about God may not be true either; he may not know anything about paradise. If he does not know about this world, how can you believe that his statements about the other world are right?
Hence, all the religions try to stick stubbornly to every statement. Howsoever ridiculous it appears, they have to stick to it. But you cannot stick to a lie for long, and in fact, I don’t see there is any point. The simple thing is that Jesus has no need to be a physicist or an astronomer or a chemist or a mathematician.
For example, I am not a physicist, so if I say something wrong about physics, it’s perfectly okay. There is no need to stick to it. I am not infallible. If somebody points out to me that this statement is not right as far as physics is concerned, I am immediately ready to correct it because I’m not a physicist. If I had made the statement, I was not making it as a physicist. I may have been illustrating something, but an illustration is an illustration. It does not change my argument.
Just the other day somebody wrote that my statement about Somnath is not historical: there were not twelve hundred priests there, but only five hundred. So how does that make any difference? My logic remains the same. But he thinks that he is proving me wrong. My argument was that those priests of the Somnath temple were saying, “There is no need to defend the temple; the Vedic mantras are enough, so there is no need for an army.” And when Mahmud Ghaznavi came, he himself was surprised that there was not anybody to defend it. Instead of five hundred, I had said twelve hundred priests were chanting mantras, doing Vedic rituals to prevent Mahmud Ghaznavi from conquering the richest temple of the country.
Warriors from all over the country had offered their services, “We can come and fight Mahmud Ghaznavi.” But they were, in fact, humiliated and insulted by the priests. The chief priest told them, “Do you think you can defend God? This is God’s temple. God defends you, you cannot defend God, so don’t be foolish. And we know the ancient science of mantras which will create a subtle energy around the temple so nobody can enter.”
But Mahmud Ghaznavi entered, and the god that defends everybody was destroyed in a single hit. He hammered the chief statue of the temple, and the statue fell into thousands of pieces. Inside the statue the priests had been hiding immense treasures, the most valuable diamonds. They were scattered all over. Mahmud Ghaznavi had never seen such diamonds. That statue was a kind of safe – there was a hole through which they were dropping those diamonds inside – and nobody could ever have suspected, no thief would ever have suspected that the statue was being used as a device to protect the treasures.
Mahmud Ghaznavi was a Mohammedan; he destroyed the statue. He was not aware that there were treasures inside it – he was simply interested in destroying the most important temple of the country.
I had said that there were twelve hundred priests, and now somebody has written that my knowledge of history is absolutely zero – there were only five hundred priests. Does it matter? My argument remains the same; twelve hundred, five hundred, five, one, any number will do. And I am not so foolish to count how many priests were there. One more or one less, it’s perfectly okay – I agree there were five hundred people. And somebody says there were not five hundred but only four hundred and ninety-nine. So okay, but my argument remains the same. The thing is my theme, not my illustration.
But the Catholic Church could not accept Galileo’s idea. They forced old Galileo to take his statement back. Galileo took his statement back. He was a man of immense sense of humor. I love Galileo. Many have thought that he was a coward – he was not. Many have thought that he had not the courage to fight, but I don’t see… What is the need to fight with fools, when you can just get out with a sense of humor? Why fight? He simply said, “Perfectly right! I will make a statement in my book that whatsoever I have said is wrong – the earth does not go around the sun, and the Catholic Church is right, the sun goes around the earth. But one thing I have to tell you: even if I take my statement back, the earth will still go around the sun. My statement won’t make any difference!”
Do you see the sense of humor of the man? His intelligence? And he made a statement in his book. In a footnote he wrote, “What I have said above is not right.” And in the end he says, “But what can I do? Still neither the sun nor the earth is bound to follow my ideas. They go on doing their thing. What Galileo says is irrelevant.”
This Polack pope has opened the case again after three hundred years because now it is an established fact that the earth goes around the sun. Now to go on saying that the sun goes around the earth looks so foolish. He has reopened the case to correct the error.
This has been going on for two thousand years; again and again they have been correcting. What does it show? It simply shows opportunism. At that moment the masses were with them, the masses were with the Bible. Now they know the masses are more aware of science, and if they have to choose between a scientific statement and a biblical statement they will choose the scientific statement. Now people are more educated. This is opportunism – reopening the case now and changing it.
He says that it is not a strategy of opportunism. Then what is it? – it is sheer business to tell the poor people about their dignity. And whenever they talk to the poor people, they always quote Jesus as saying: “Blessed are the poor, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.” They forget completely that the meaning of Jesus is totally different. The whole statement is: “Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.” He does not mean that they should be starving, poor; he simply means that they should not be egoists. “Blessed are the poor in spirit…” The ego makes you feel higher and superior to others. When there is no ego, that is poverty of the spirit. It has nothing to do with the poverty that exists in India, in the Philippines, in Pakistan. This is not the poverty Jesus is talking about. But they use Jesus’ quotations, and they go on saying that this is not opportunism. Then what is it?
And he says it is not “…a means of currying favor with the masses.” He must be consciously feeling guilty. It is so apparent that it is simply a way to have the support of the people. I know it perfectly well. I have done all kinds of things – I have been moving with the masses, and I know how masses become victims. It is so simple. I have talked to crowds of Hindus, I have talked to crowds of Mohammedans, Jainas, Sikhs, and I have really enjoyed all those things. I have giggled inside to myself, “What kind of fools the world is full of!”
I have talked to Jainas on Mahavira, and they have come to me and they have said, “For the first time, listening to you, we have understood what greatness, what immense truth Mahavira has given to the world.” For twenty-five centuries they had not discovered that truth. In fact, it has nothing to do with Mahavira; I am simply putting my ideas through his mouth. But they were worshipping me.
I have talked to Sikhs on Nanak, and they said, “Nobody has ever been able to open the mysteries of the statements of Nanak as you have done.” There are no mysteries, or anything; those mysteries are my inventions, but I had not told them this. I simply laughed inside to myself. You never found me laughing; I always laughed inside because laughing outside is dangerous.
I have talked to Hindus about Krishna, and they were rejoicing. Fifty thousand to a hundred thousand people used to gather to listen to me on Krishna, and they were thrilled that their Krishna has such profundities, such great insights. In fact, if Krishna were there he would have been very puzzled.
I have talked about many people. If they come to the ashram, they won’t be allowed inside, but when I have talked about them I have given my insight to their words.
I receive many letters from the West, “Nobody has told us the truth about Jesus except you.” It has nothing to do with Jesus, it has nothing to do with Krishna, it has nothing to do with Mahavira or Buddha. I am simply talking about my truth.
But then finally I said, “It is enough! It is absolutely absurd, meaningless because they cannot understand. Only their egos are feeling fulfilled, nourished. I am not helping them; on the contrary, their egos are becoming bigger.” Hence I dropped that whole thing completely. And the moment I stopped talking on Mahavira, Jainas disappeared. Only a few Jainas remained who had understood me – that it has nothing to do with Mahavira, it is my own understanding that I am giving to Mahavira. It is my light that I am focusing on Mahavira. Only those few Jainas who understood have remained with me.
Only those Hindus who understood that it has nothing to do with Krishna and Gita have remained with me. It is my experience; I am simply using them as excuses. The same is true about others. But I could only do that when I decided that I do not have to go to the masses at all.
Just the other day I was reading an article against me. Somebody has written, “Why don’t I go outside the ashram?” The reason he has given is that I have hypnotized the whole atmosphere, so whosoever enters here, the moment he enters the gate, becomes hypnotized. So I don’t go outside the ashram because there it will be very difficult to hypnotize people. I loved the idea – a great discovery!
What the pope is doing is simply “…currying favor with the masses.” And he says it is the church’s duty. To whom? Duty to whom? He means duty to the poor. That’s wrong. It is duty to the vested interests; it is service to the establishment.
So only on two points do I agree with him. One is: “Defending the human dignity of the poor and their hope for a human future is not a luxury for the church…” It is not a luxury, it is its very life, its basic need. And the second point: he says, “It is her duty…” That too is true. It is duty to the establishment, duty to all that is ugly, to all that is dead, to all that is past.

The outraged husband, having caught his wife in another man’s arms, shouted, “Sir! This is my wife, and you ought to be ashamed of yourself!”
The man replied, “If that is your wife, you ought to be ashamed of yourself!”

It was eleven-thirty, and Hunchback Harry wanted to be home in time for the midnight movie, so he took a shortcut through the graveyard. He was very nervous as he walked among the gravestones. Suddenly there was a flash of lightning, and a loud clap of thunder, and a voice boomed, “I am Lucifer! I am the Devil!”
Terrified out of his wits, Hunchback Harry cowered behind a tombstone shivering. “Dost thou have a desire?” thundered Lucifer.
“Y-y-yes,” mumbled Hunchback Harry. “I want to lose my hunchback.”
“Right! It shall be done!” shouted Lucifer, and vanished. And thus Harry lost his hunchback.
The next night in the pub the lads were amazed.
“Hey, Harry,” said Charlie, “what happened to your hunchback?” So Harry told about how he had walked home through the graveyard and met Lucifer.
“Mm, that’s interesting,” said Charlie, and he decided he was going to walk home through the graveyard that night.
As he crept along there was a blinding flash and loud thunder. “I am Lucifer! I am the Devil!” Charlie dived in panic behind the nearest tombstone and shuddered with fear. “Dost thou have a hunchback?” roared Lucifer.
“N-n-no,” stuttered Charlie.
“Right! Take this one!”

I agree with the Polack pope, but not according to him, not what he wants. I agree according to myself. That is the only way I can agree with him.
A certain innocence is needed. But the priests are never innocent. They are so knowledgeable, they are lost in a jungle of words and concepts and beautiful theories. Somebody has to hit them hard and bring them back to earth. That’s what I’m trying to do. It hurts.
I have received a news cutting from Kolkata. The reporter says that he went to Mother Teresa with a cutting from a newspaper about my statement that she is idiotic. She became so mad that she tore up the cutting and threw it away. She was so angry that she was not even willing to make any comment. But she has made a comment – tearing up the newspaper cutting!
The reporter said, “I was puzzled. I said, ‘The cutting belonged to me. I had just come to show it to you and to hear your comment.’”
And these people think they are religious people. In fact, by tearing up the cutting she simply proved what I have said was right: she is idiotic – this is idiotic. I receive so many “compliments” – in inverted commas – from all over the world that if I start tearing them up that would be enough exercise for me. And I hate exercise!
These popes need a little more innocence. These Mother Teresas lead a life of such hypocrisy, such cunningness, such deceptiveness, that they need to become a little more human, a little more simple, a little more innocent. Only then will they see the truth. And it is time that the truth should be seen, otherwise there is no hope for humanity. It will go on and on in circles; in the same circles it has been going on for thousands of years.
Jesus is right when he says, “Unless you are like small children you will not enter my kingdom of God.” And these popes and Teresas are not like small children. I would like my sannyasins to be like small children…

The Jones family recently moved from their suburban home into a far-out nudist colony. One day the youngest son walked up to his father and asked. “Dad, how can I tell a rich man from a poor man in this place?”

Of course, this is a great question for a child in a nudist colony. How can you tell who is rich, who is poor? Of course, when people are dressed you see immediately who is rich, who is poor. But in a nudist colony?

His father was speechless for a second, but fathers can’t accept that they don’t know. Then laughingly he said, “I guess a rich man has a bigger cock than a poor man.”
This answer seemed to satisfy his son’s curiosity and he left.
A few days later while working in the garden he heard his son yelling, “Dad, quick! Come quick!”
He jumped up and started running toward the house calling, “What is wrong, son? What is wrong?”
The boy shouted back, “There is a poor man chasing mummy and getting richer by the moment!”

Enough for today.

============================================================

The first question:
Osho,
“Holier-than-thou” seems to be my lifelong mantra. Growing up as a Catholic, I thanked God daily that I was a part of the one true religion. As a Catholic nun I knew I had “made it.” Now, as a sannyasin, I observe those same attitudes and judgments happening at every turn. I watch myself as I act superior around non-sannyasins and inferior around those who have been with you longer than I.
I really exhaust myself in constructing intricate continua along which to place everyone in relation to myself. I simply can't shake hard enough to let it go.
Please comment.
Religion, as it has existed down the ages, is nothing but a subtle ego trip. Far more subtle, of course, than those trips which people are making for money, power, prestige, respectability, and all that. But the basic quality is the same.
Man’s mind has been molded, distorted, poisoned, for only one thing, and that is the ego. Sacrifice everything for the ego! That is the single note of all our civilizations, cultures, societies, religions, educational systems. From the very beginning we implant seeds of ambition in the child’s mind. Then we devote twenty-five years in the schools, colleges, and universities to nursing, watering those seeds so that they can have roots, branches, flowers, fruits.
Twenty-five years is a long time; it is one-third of your total life. And when you are conditioned for such a long time for ambitiousness, it certainly becomes very difficult to get rid of it. But ambition starts in such a way that you never become aware what poison it contains. The bottle of ambition contains pure poison, but the label is not that of poison: the label says it is pure nectar.
We live through words, we are word-oriented. Our whole life is dominated by words. Beautiful words can hide ugly realities. In fact, ugly realities exist in the world only because we are camouflaging them behind beautiful facades of language, philosophy, theology, ideology. Just give it a beautiful word and you can cover up anything.
The so-called religious people are the most egoistic because religion is one of the most beautiful words. It contains the whole spectrum of all that has been valued, appreciated, longed for: freedom, love, liberation, God, nirvana, moksha, immortality. What more can you ask? It contains the whole kingdom of God. The word is so beautiful that one has to be really intelligent to see what it is hiding behind it.
Religion is nothing but a very unholy trip in the name of holiness. Hence, you will see in the faces of your saints, in their eyes, in their gestures, nothing but the pious ego. But you will have to watch because it comes from the back door. It is never there in its nudity; it is always hiding behind curtains. Don’t be deceived by the curtains – the curtains may be beautiful, made of beautiful material, but what is behind the curtain has to be looked into.
Your saints have been doing hard work, their austerities are arduous. They are doing almost the impossible: celibacy, fighting with biology; fasting, fighting with their physiology; and doing everything that is unnatural for a single purpose – that whenever you do something unnatural you are respected. Naturally, you are thought to be a superior kind, a superman. You are no ordinary man. Ordinary men live ordinary lives – they love food, they enjoy food. The religious person is not allowed to enjoy food.
Mahatma Gandhi used a very strange chutney in his ashram which had never been used before – chutney made out of neem leaves. Now, neem leaves are the most bitter leaves, and if you eat chutney made out of neem leaves it is going to destroy all your food, it is going to destroy all your joy. The very idea is enough to destroy it.
When Louis Fischer, the American thinker-writer-philosopher, stayed with Gandhi to study his philosophy and life – he was proposing to write a book on Gandhi, so he wanted to be close to him to understand his ways of working, his ways of living, everything minutely – Gandhi invited him every day to come for food with him. On the first day he was very happy – Gandhi himself inviting him. But when he tasted the chutney, he could not believe… How was he going to manage? It made his whole tongue so bitter that to eat anything afterward would not change the taste.
Being a logical man, and being a very polite, cultured man, he could not say no to Gandhi. He thought the best way was to swallow the whole of the chutney in one gulp and then enjoy the food, rather than destroying the food again and again. That chutney had to be tasted, and it was a rule in Gandhi’s ashram that you could not leave anything on the plate, everything had to be eaten. So he swallowed the chutney in one gulp and Gandhi immediately ordered more chutney for him. He said, “Look! A man of understanding can immediately see the medicinal qualities of neem leaves.” For seven days he had to suffer that hell.
The whole idea behind the neem chutney was to destroy your delicate, fragile taste buds so that you only stuff yourself without tasting: aswad – tastelessness. That has been one of the very cherished goals of religious people. So if you are enjoying your food, you are ordinary. Ordinariness has to be condemned – only then can you become extraordinary. And then certainly, deep down, the feeling of holier-than-thou.
It is present in all the religions around the world; it has nothing particularly to do with Catholicism. Try to see the mechanism: the unnatural seems to be respected because the man who is capable of doing it seems to have certain powers which the ordinary person has not got. So anything that seems ordinary and natural has to be condemned, and anything that seems to be unnatural has to be respected. Laughter is condemned because it is very ordinary.
Christians say Jesus never laughed – I cannot agree with it. Only a man like Jesus has the capacity for real laughter. But Christians saying that Jesus never laughed are certainly making a point: they are saying that he is so sacred he cannot commit such a profane act as laughter.
Jainas say that Mahavira never defecated or urinated. Such ordinary acts. That is one of the criteria, whether somebody is really enlightened or not – toilet is the criterion. You see the stupidity of it? They say Mahavira never perspired. That is possible only if he had no skin – if instead of his skin, he was living in a kind of plastic bag. Plastic does not perspire, but skin has to perspire. That is part of its aliveness. It is very fundamental, you can only live if your skin perspires. Certainly dead people don’t perspire, they cannot. Mahavira was either dead or plastic!
A living person has to perspire, for the simple reason that every pore of your skin breathes. There are millions of small pores breathing into your body; you are not only breathing through your nose. If your nose was allowed to breathe and your whole body was covered with a thick paint so that all your skin’s pores were closed, you would die within three hours. If you were allowed to breathe through the nose, you would still die within three hours because your whole body needs to breathe; each cell of your body breathes.
And when it is so hot… Mahavira lived in one of the hottest parts of this country, Bihar, and he lived naked and traveled on foot. He must have been perspiring more than anybody else. Perspiration has a natural function: when it is too hot your body perspires to keep your body temperature within a certain limit. You perspire, your body relieves some water from the skin’s pores, that water evaporates taking away your body heat. Hence, the body can maintain a constant temperature. If you don’t perspire, your body will become so hot that you will burst forth, or you will be burned from the inside.
But all these stupid ideas are propounded for the simple reason to show that Mahavira is special, that Jesus is special. Something extraordinary has to be fabricated.
You say, “‘Holier-than-thou’ seems to be my lifelong mantra.” It is in fact everybody’s lifelong mantra, in different ways. Somebody is trying to show his ego by his money; somebody by his knowledge; somebody by his political power; somebody by his austerities; somebody by his religiousness. But it is all the same – only the excuses differ, but the motive is the same…

A bus loaded with tourists was making a rather prolonged drive along the seafront in Sicily, when it stopped for the passengers to have a brief rest and enjoy the scenery. At once, most of the men rushed up the embankment where they relieved themselves, despite the fact that the women remaining on the bus could see them.
When the men reboarded the bus, one indignant wife was so furious that she told her husband and the others in a loud tone of voice exactly what she thought of the strange maneuver. “But, Jock,” she continued in a more conciliatory tone, “I was awfully proud when you took out ours!”

The motive is the same. It may be profane, it may be sacred; it does not matter, it makes no difference at all. The motive is the same: somehow to prove, “I am greater than you, holier than you, wiser than you, more virtuous than you.”
You say, “…I thanked God daily that I was part of the one true religion.” Every religion believes that. There are three hundred religions on the earth, and every religion believes in the same idiotic idea. There are hundreds of countries in the world, and every country believes in the same nonsense. There are many races, many colors, but everybody believes that there is something special about his country, his religion, his race, his color.
If you observe these attitudes of others, you will be immediately aware what kind of idiocy prevails among human beings. But it will be difficult for you to see your own idiotic, irrational prejudices. First watch others, then it will become easier for you to see that the same is the case with you.

I always loved a beautiful story about a professor of philosophy; he was the head of the philosophy department at the University of Paris. He was a very logical man, obviously. He was a great philosopher.
One day he declared to his students, “I am the greatest man in the world.”
The students were shocked. They had never thought that their philosopher, their professor, who was such a logical man, would ever say something so absurd.
One of the students asked, “Sir, you have always been proving your statements rationally – can you prove this one too?”
And the professor laughed and he said, “Yes. If I cannot prove it, then I would not have made it in the first place.”
He spread on the board a world map. All the students watched him: “What he is doing?”
Then he asked them, “Which country is the best country in the world, and the greatest country in the world?”
Of course, they were all French so they said, “France.”
So he said, “Now, I have only to prove that if I am the greatest man in France that will do. France is obviously the greatest country in the world and I am the greatest man in France, so the natural corollary will be: I am the greatest man in the world.”
They had to agree. It was logical.
Then he asked, “Forget the whole world, look at the map of France. Which is the most beautiful and the greatest city in France?”
Now, the students started feeling a little worried that he was coming closer to the point. But they all lived in Paris, they all loved Paris, and they were all told from their very childhood that Paris was the greatest city in the world. And they said, “Of course, Paris.”
And the professor said, “Then we can drop the whole of France, it is now only Paris in which, if it is proved that I am the greatest man, then, as a natural consequence, it will be proved that I am the greatest man in the world.”
Then he asked, “Can you tell me which is the greatest place, the wisest, the most beautiful, the most sacred in Paris?”
Naturally, the University of Paris, the seat of wisdom.
And then he asked, “Now tell me, in the University of Paris which is the most significant, the most important department?”
Now what can compete with philosophy? And they were all students of philosophy, so they had to agree that the philosophy department was, of course, the very center of the University of Paris; it is the very soul.
And the professor laughed and then he said, “Now, do you see the point? And I am the head of the philosophy department.”

Deep down everybody is trying to prove it. If you ask Indians, they think India is the only religious country in the world. Remember, the only. All others are worldly countries; India is a sacred land, the land of the rishis, of the Upanishads and the Vedas, the land of Mahavira, Krishna, Buddha, the land of Kabir, Dadu, Nanak, Meera, Chaitanya – the land of all the great mahatmas, sages and saints. In fact, Indians believe that even the gods in paradise desire to be born in India; they are jealous of Indians.
No Indian would ever doubt it because it fulfills some inner need of his own. This is a vicarious way of saying, “I am the most religious person in the world – I belong to the most religious land, the sacred land.”
Just the other day I was listening to a song, a beautiful song, which tells how a pilgrim had gone to visit the places where Mohammed lived, Mecca and Medina. The song says, “Your paradise is beautiful, God. But for the moment, at least, I am not interested in it at all. I am in the city where Mohammed lived and walked. Even the dust of this city is far more valuable than your paradise. And if I have the choice, then I will live in Mecca or Medina rather than going to paradise.”
Mohammedans believe – it is part of the Mohammedan religion – that if you are really religious, at least once in your life you should go to the Kaaba; to visit the place where Mohammed began his sermons, where he composed his first part of the Koran. If you don’t go to hajj, on this sacred pilgrimage, you are not a complete Mohammedan – something remains incomplete in you.
The same is the case with the Jews. They think Jerusalem is not part of this world: it is a sacred city. Hindus say, “Kashi does not belong to this earth, it belongs to the beyond.”
These are all vicarious ways of fulfilling your ego. So remember, it has nothing to do with Catholicism as such; it is a very common disease for all religious people. They are utterly blind that they are projecting their ego in beautiful ways.
You say, “…I was part of the one true religion.” Every religion thinks, “My religion is the true religion.” Ask the Jainas, they say, “All other religions are untrue, only Jainism is the true religion.” And once you accept the idea of any religion as the true religion, you become a fanatic, you become obsessed. Then every nonsense is possible through you.
If you believe Mohammedanism is the only true religion, as Mohammedans believe, then it is your sacred duty to transform the whole world into a Mohammedan world. Even if people are to be forced violently to be Mohammedans, it is your sacred duty to do it because you are doing it for their own sake. Even if they have to be tortured and killed, it is worth it because if they die without becoming Mohammedans they are bound to go to hell. Save them from falling into hell!
Christians have the same idea: Christ is the only begotten son of God, and those who are with Christ will be saved. On the last Judgment Day he will come and sort out, “Who are my people and who are not my people.” Those he will choose as his people will enter paradise with great celebration, songs, dances, music. And those who are rejected will start falling into hell – and the Christian hell is the worst because it lasts forever; it is eternal. It is a very strange idea.
In one short life of seventy years… Christians believe in only one life, you are born only once. And this small life of seventy years will be decisive for your infinity, for eternity. This seems to be unfair and unjust, absolutely ridiculous. How can you commit so much sin in such a small life that your punishment will be for eternity? Even if you continuously commit sin – twenty-four hours a day, not even taking a tea break, for seventy years; not going to bed, not sleeping, just sinning and sinning and sinning – then still, eternal condemnation seems to be too much, unfair.
Bertrand Russell is right when he says, “I have counted all the sins that I have committed. If I am punished for them, then the hardest, rocklike magistrate cannot throw me into jail for more than four years. If my thoughts about committing sins are also to be accounted for – which I have not committed, just thought…” Somebody’s beautiful wife passing by, and just a fantasy – if that has also to be counted as adultery… And the Polack pope will agree that it has to be counted. Not only somebody else’s wife; the Polack pope says, “If you look at your own wife with desire it is adultery.” Your own wife? If you look with desire, appreciation, if you say, “You look beautiful,” that’s enough: you have committed adultery.
“Even if these thoughts have to be counted,” Russell says, “then at the most I can be put into prison for eight years. But for these sins, to throw me into hell for eternity is very unfair.” Then God is not as fair, compassionate, and kind as Christians, Mohammedans and others go on saying. Then God seems to be really an ugly despot, far uglier than Adolf Hitler or Joseph Stalin or Mao Zedong, far more cruel than Tamerlane, Nadir Shah and other murderers of history. But one can go on believing once you have accepted the idea, “This is the only true religion.”
Just now, Jainas are celebrating one thousand years since the completion of the establishment of a beautiful statue of Bahubali, one of their great sages. It is one of the biggest statues in the world. Now, nearabout one million people are gathered in the province of Karnataka, in Gomteshwar, to celebrate this special occasion. One thousand years the statue has stood, in rain, in sun, in wind. It is so big and huge that it cannot be sheltered. It stands naked. It is part of a hill; the whole hill has been carved. But you will be surprised to know that Bahubali committed suicide.
But Jainas cannot see it. It is impossible for them to see that a man who committed suicide cannot be enlightened. They call Bahubali “Bhagwan.” He cannot be “the blessed one” because the man who has attained the ultimate truth is neither interested in living a single moment more… If death comes, he welcomes it. If death does not come, he cannot desire for it. And committing suicide simply means desiring for death; at least one desire is still there.
But in a way this is the logical conclusion of the whole Jaina philosophy. It is life-negative, it is against life, it is anti-life. This is the logical conclusion of it: renounce life, escape from life. Every so-called Jaina saint is committing a gradual suicide. And Jainism is the only religion in the world which allows suicide. Of course, they give it a beautiful name, they call it sallekhana. One is so fulfilled, they say; one is so blissful, they say, that one feels there is no need to live any more – so one commits suicide.
But if one is so fulfilled that there is no need to live any more, is there any need to commit suicide? The fulfilled person accepts with joy whatsoever is happening. If life is happening, good; if death is happening, good. He lives in a dance, he dies in a dance. He cannot commit suicide.
Suicide certainly shows that he is still incomplete. Something in him is still desiring, something in him still wants – what it wants is immaterial. But Jainism says if you sacrifice your life totally then the other world is yours; so at the ultimate moment it is better to commit suicide than to die naturally. Everything natural is wrong. Suicide has something religious in it: you commit it, you do it.
The desire to live is a very natural desire. Everybody has it: animals have it, trees have it, birds have it. It is nothing special. But the desire to finish life, to put an end to it, and you earn great virtue. The motive is of earning, the motive is to get something out of it; you are sacrificing life as a means to attain something. It simply proves that the desire is there, the motive is there – but Jainas cannot see it.
I will not call Bahubali a bhagwan – no, not at all. His suicide proves definitely that something was wrong in his being. The really enlightened person neither wants to live, nor wants to die. If life is there, he dances with life; if death is there, he dances with death. Each moment is accepted in its totality without any desire for things to be otherwise. But Jainas will not be able to see it.
Now you can see it because you are no longer a Catholic nun. You are gaining a significant insight; you are coming out of that parrotlike knowledge, that repetitive knowledge that every religion conditions people for. In fact, parrots have been complaining to me, “Please don’t compare us with pundits!” I can see their point – parrots are not so stupid…

A vicar buys the only parrot left in the pet shop.
“I have to warn you, vicar,” says the shopkeeper, “that he swears terribly. But if you want him to stop, take him by the feet and swing him around in the air.”
The vicar takes the bird with him on a plane trip, and soon the parrot begins to swear. Embarrassed, the vicar takes the bird out of the cage, and swings him round in the passageway of the plane.
“Ahhh!” the parrot cries. “Just feel that fucking breeze!”

Parrots are not so stupid, but pundits are far more so. You can forgive the parrots, they are only poor parrots, but you cannot forgive the pundits.
You say, “As a catholic nun I knew I had ‘made it.’” That’s what they all go on hypnotizing you for. People are living like zombies in Catholic monasteries, nunneries; in Buddhist viharas. The Jaina monks and nuns are all living like zombies, conditioned, deeply conditioned, hypnotized by constant repetition that they have “made it.” And of course when it is constantly repeated to you, you start believing it. In fact, you want to believe it and when everybody says that you have done it, you jump upon the opportunity. You immediately accept it without any argument. But you are, in a way, fortunate that you were capable of “unmaking” it.
You say, “Now, as a sannyasin, I observe those same attitudes and judgments happening at every turn.” They must have gone deep in you, they must have become part of your blood, your bones, your very marrow. It will take a little time before they leave your system totally. But if you remain aware they are bound to leave.

Two psychiatrists were on the first green. The first one missed a two-footer and muttered, “Nuts!”
“Please, Max,” said the partner, “let us not talk shop.”

People become accustomed to words, ideas. Even if they change, the first change is only on the circumference, the center remains the same. You have changed your outer habits. The nuns’ clothes are called habits: you have changed from white habits to orange habits. But by changing the clothes nothing is changed; that is only a gesture. Much has to be changed now. And it is good that the question is arising in you, that you are becoming alert you are still carrying the same old judgmental attitudes.

One morning before school, little Johnny was sitting at breakfast when his mother asked, “What would you like for breakfast, Johnny?”
“I want some fucking cornflakes,” said Johnny.
Whereupon the mother belted little Johnny on the ear and shouted, “Don’t ask for that again, do you hear?” Then she turned to Johnny’s little brother, Tommy, and asked, “What do you want for breakfast, Tommy?”
Tommy sat nervously in his chair for a moment, then answered, “Ahem, I… I don’t know, Mom. But I sure don’t want any of those fucking cornflakes!”

You have changed, but not much. The important thing is that you are becoming aware that those judgmental attitudes are still hanging around you.
You say, “I watch myself as I act superior around nonsannyasins, and inferior around those who have been with you longer than I.” This is what has been told to everybody: that you have to put yourself higher and higher, that you have to climb the ladder, that you have to be ambitious, that you have to be the first.
My whole effort here is to tell you that you have to be just yourself, neither first nor last. And you are so unique that nobody has been like you before, and nobody is going to be like you again. Hence, there is no question of comparison at all, you are so unique that you are incomparable. So drop this whole idea of comparison.
It is comparison which creates trouble; then somebody is higher than you and somebody is lower than you. If you drop this comparative habit, then nobody is higher than you and nobody is lower than you. Then suddenly you recognize everybody’s uniqueness. The moment you can see everybody’s uniqueness, your life has a different flavor. It becomes non-ambitious, it becomes non-egoistic. Then you are not trying to imitate, then you are not trying to compete; then you are simply being yourself, relaxing with yourself. A great love for yourself arises. And not only for yourself, a great love for everyone else also because everyone is so unique. It is because of the uniqueness of individuals around the world that the world is so beautiful.
You say, “I really exhaust myself in constructing intricate continua along which to place everyone in relation to myself.” You are doing an absolutely impossible thing. You are simply yourself; there is no need to put yourself into any hierarchy. In a hierarchy somebody will be higher than you, somebody will be lower than you. The lower will feed your ego and the higher will hurt your ego. Both are dangerous, and because the higher hurts you, you will hurt the lower, you will take revenge with the lower.
There is a story…

Once, Birbal, one of the very significant people around the great emperor Akbar, cracked a joke. Akbar was angry because the joke was on him. He was so angry that he slapped Birbal in front of many people. But Birbal did not miss the opportunity – he immediately slapped the person who was standing at his side, who was lower in rank.
The person who was slapped by Birbal could not believe what was happening because he was not concerned with it at all. Birbal had cracked a joke and he had received the reward! Now, why should he be hit? He was nothing to do with it.
And he asked, “What are you doing?”
Birbal said, “Don’t waste time, hit another person lower than you. The world is round. Sooner or later the hit will reach Akbar.” And it is said it reached him in the night – the wife hit Akbar.
The next day he said to Birbal, “You are right, the world is round. But you have always to hit the person who is lower than you; you have to be alert about that.”

So everybody is hitting everybody else, hurting everybody else. That’s why we have created this insane world.
Drop this whole attitude, this whole approach. With me, nobody has to play the game of holier-than-thou. To me there is no division between the profane and the sacred, between the holy and the unholy – it is all one.

The second question:
Osho,
Are there any meaningless coincidences, or is everything a gigantic, precise mechanism?
As far as ninety-nine point nine percent of people are concerned everything is meaningless, just coincidences and coincidences. Only for the very few rare people – the buddhas, the awakened ones, the krishnas, the christs, the zarathustras – only for those very few people who can be counted on fingers, the world is not coincidental.
But unless you become awake it remains coincidental. You are in a deep sleep, groping in your somnambulism. How can there be any purpose, any significance? How can there be any sense of direction? You are just walking like a drunkard – not knowing where you are going, not knowing from where you are coming, not knowing exactly who you are.

A German once sat in zazen,
Asked “Who am I?” again and again.
“If I don’t sort this out,
I shall stomp, scream und shout!
For I’m German, Heil Hitler! Amen!”

A German sitting in zazen is bound to “stomp, scream und shout.” And what will he shout? “Heil Hitler!”

There was an old fellow from Lyme
Who married three wives at one time.
When asked, “Why the third?”
He replied, “One is absurd,
And bigamy, sir, is a crime!”

Two wild elephants were grazing in the jungle, when suddenly Tarzan streaked in front of them in hot pursuit of Jane. One elephant turned to the other and asked, “How do you suppose he can breathe through that little trunk?”

A drunk and his inebriated friend were sitting at a bar. “Do you know what the time is?” asked the drunk.
“Sure,” said the friend.
“Thanks,” said the drunk.

Two small mice were crouched under a table in the chorus girls’ dressing room of a big Broadway show.
“Wow!” exclaimed the first mouse. “Have you ever seen so many gorgeous legs in your life?”
“Means nothing to me,” said the second. “I’m a titmouse.”

Jacqueline’s one-time mother-in-law phoned her recently to ask about her health.
“I’m in bed with arthritis,” moaned the young woman.
“What ever happened to the other Greek?” asked the ex-mother-in-law.

An Irish maid went to confession and told her parish priest that she had been having an affair with the butler who was married and already had two children.
The priest admonished her, saying that she had sinned against the church.
“Oh, no, father,” she explained. “It was against the china closet. And it would have done your heart good to have heard those dishes rattle!”

As far as ninety-nine point nine percent of people are concerned, everything is accidental: their birth is accidental, their love is accidental, their death is accidental, and all that passes in between. Everything is accidental.
That’s why when you fall in love… The phrase “falling in love” – it is not anything conscious in you. Suddenly you see a woman or a man and some instinctive force, some unconscious force possesses you. It is a fall, it is not conscious; you are unconscious. Hence, the people who are not in love will think you have gone crazy. All lovers are thought to be a little bit insane, but only by others. The same thing happens to others too, in their own time – then others think about them that they are a little crazy. Why does love look so crazy? – there is a point in it.
It is accidental. If somebody asks you why you have fallen in love with a woman or a man, what are you going to say? Whatsoever you will say will look very silly. The color of the eyes, somebody will say – now, what nonsense is this? Or the length of the nose, or the shape of the eyes, or the way she walks, or the way he stands. What nonsense! What has it to do with love? You are just finding something so that you can pretend to be rational, conscious, in control.
Just as people fall in love, they fall out; and when they fall out it is the same nose, the same color of the eyes, the same hairstyle, the same woman, the same man. What has happened now? Nothing has changed. You can fall in love today and you can fall out tomorrow. In fact, not to fall out tomorrow simply means you are not very intelligent because from now onward there is just repetition. Once you have learned the topography of the other, it is finished! Now the same curves and the same topography – how long are you going to touch the long nose? It will be the same nose every day.
Whatever happens in ordinary life is all accidental. Your birth was accidental. Maybe your father was not thinking about you at all – in fact, he was not even thinking about your mother while he was making love to her, he was thinking of Sophia Loren. He was not concerned with the woman he was making love with, he was just doing it like an exercise, a gymnastics. He had to do it because he is the husband; he is supposed to do it. He is fulfilling a duty.
And the woman was not at all thinking of your father either. She was thinking of Muhammad Ali, “The Greatest.” And your father is the farthest from Muhammad Ali, the greatest – there is nothing to compare. That’s why women always close their eyes when they make love – shy, knowing perfectly well that they are not interested in this man. They are thinking about somebody else, some superstar. It is better to think – when your eyes are closed you can fantasize in a better way.
These people have given birth to you – Sophia Loren and Muhammad Ali were not making love. The people who were making love have given birth to you, and they were not thinking of each other – and not at all about you! How could they think about you? They had not even heard of you, they had not even seen a picture of you, no idea that an orange sannyasin was going to be born! Otherwise they would have stopped in the middle.
It is all unconscious. How have you chosen your job? Just unconscious…

When I entered university, somebody was filling in his form, the application form. I had no fountain pen, so I asked him if I could borrow his fountain pen, just for a minute, to fill in my form.
He said, very happily, “Do, because I am hesitating about which subjects to choose. So while I am thinking about it, you can fill in your form.”
So I filled in my form. He looked at my form and he said, “Philosophy? That sounds good, I will also put that.” And he joined the philosophy department. Now he is a professor of philosophy!

Just a few days ago he came here – just a week ago – to visit, with his students. Now he is a doctor of philosophy – and it was just by coincidence. If I had been just one minute late, or if I had had a fountain pen with me, then nobody knows what would have happened to this man. One thing is certain, he would not have been a doctor of philosophy, a professor of philosophy. Now he has lived his whole life as a professor of philosophy, thinking that he has chosen it.
When Sheela brought his name, “Dr. Patel has come and he says that he is an old colleague, an old friend of yours.” I tried to remember. In a way, certainly, I have been very fateful to him: I have determined the whole course of his life. Then I remembered that he had filled out his form just by looking at my form.
Philosophy sounded good, and it certainly sounds good if you think of physiology, biology, zoology. Philosophy sounds good, something great, and he liked the word. And now his whole life he thought he had chosen it.
Your job is not chosen by you. You are living the life of a somnambulist.

A swank, Long Island country club staged a ladies’ tournament last summer. The day before the award of the trophy to the winner, Harris, the committee chairman discovered that no trophy had been bought. He hurried to Jenkins Jewelers and was told that he could not get the cup engraved in twenty-four hours. Jenkins suggested that the sample cup that he had on display be given to the winner with the explanation that one just like it, with a suitable inscription, would be delivered to her the following week.
Next evening, the tournament winner marched proudly up to the platform to receive her trophy. Harris, under stress and with a few scotches under his belt, forgot to mention that the cup was a sample, and one with the correct inscription would be delivered later.
She looked at what was inscribed on the cup and fainted dead away. Harris then picked up the trophy. It read, “Awarded to the Best Wire-Haired Bitch in Nassau County!”

If you look around you will see it is all accidental. Your whole life is accidental. You try to make some sort of meaning out of it just to console yourself, but in fact there is no meaning in it. Only buddhas have meaning, nobody else has any meaning.

Riedel came running into the clubhouse yelling for a doctor. An MD came over and was amazed to see the man had a putter rammed up his butt.
“What happened?” asked the physician. “I was playing golf with my wife,” replied Riedel. It was the first time she had ever played. I got on the green in three, but her second shot landed an inch from the cup. I bent over to pick up her ball and I said, ‘It looks like your hole, honey,’ and that’s all I remember!”

Two Scotsmen are on holiday in Rome, and the first night of their visit they decide to go out drinking. So, turning in to the first bar they find, they order two pints of beer.
“I’m sorry,” says the barman, “but we don’t sell beer.”
The Scotsmen are absolutely horrified and ask the barman, “What do you sell?”
The barman starts going through a huge and confusing drinks list.
“Look, Jimmy,” says one Scot, having a sudden brain wave, “what does the pope drink?”
“Crème de menthe,” replies the barman.
“Okay, give us two pints of that then,” says the Scot. And between the two of them they consume, during the evening, nearly thirty pints of crème de menthe.
So the next morning they both regain consciousness lying in the gutter covered in green vomit.
“Oh, God!” says one. “What happened last night?”
“We were drinking that stuff the pope drinks,” groans the other.
“Well,” replies the first, “if the pope drinks that stuff, no wonder they have to carry him about in a chair all day!”

Enough for today.