---
title: The Last Testament Vol 2 01
series: The Last Testament Vol 2 01-30
talk_number: 1
url: https://oshoworld.com/the-last-testament-vol-2-01
language: English
duration: 02:14:54
author: INTERVIEW WITH THE WORLD PRESS
scraped_at: 2026-01-03T09:29:38.104696+00:00
---
Amano Wilfred,
Author of Das Rote Tuch, Germany
Osho,
Looking back on the development of the neo-sannyas movement, it appears to me very well planned, just like a seed which has the whole plan of the tree inside itself. In which state of growth is the tree of your religion now?
It is true, but nobody has planned it. Looking back, you can see all the stages from the seed to the flower, but if you look at the seed you will not be able to predict what is going to happen.
The seed is completely closed. It has potential, but we don’t know whether the seed will fall into the right soil, or will fall on a stone and will never grow, or may be eaten by animals, destroyed by children. Nobody knows what is going to happen in the future. The future remains open; unknown, unknowable.
And that’s how sannyas has grown. I have never planned it – not the way an architect plans how a building is going to be. A building is a construction, it is not a growth. A construction can be planned, but growth is life. It is an opening into many dimensions; what root, what dimension it will take, nobody knows.
I have functioned continuously from this innocence. I am not a man who plans; I trust existence so much, and planning means distrust. I know that existence has helped me up to this moment, and I have never done anything. The next moment also will be taken care of. To me, this trust is real religion, not believing in Jesus Christ or God, or believing in the Bible or the Koran.
No, living a life of spontaneity without any plan, trusting whatsoever happens, is the right thing. And when I say “whatsoever,” I mean whatsoever – because we don’t have any plan, so we cannot have any judgment of what happens. If we have a plan, then there is every possibility of disappointment.
Existence has no obligation to follow my plan. That’s why religious people have been saying through the centuries, “Man proposes and God disposes.” There is no God to dispose; we have disposed of God himself. But if man proposes, he is bound to come to a point where there will be disappointment.
Our vision is small, existence is infinite; so whatsoever we can decide will be of no significance. In fact, it will create all kinds of hindrances. If existence is going to the south and we plan to go to the north, then there will be a tension between you and existence. This is the cause of so many people around the world living in anxiety, anguish, tension, disappointment, frustration. The reason is, that in the first place they started expecting, planning, hoping, desiring. Existence is not at fault. Existence is not “disposing their proposals,” existence is simply going on its own way. And my experience is just to go with existence. I call it the “let-go way.”
So, wherever the river takes. Yes, retrospectively you may be able to figure that there seems to be planning, but there has never been planning. But things have happened that should give every sannyasin courage to live without bothering about the future. My whole experience proves this. Things just go on happening – allow them to happen. That’s all. Don’t hinder, don’t try to change the direction. Relax, trusting like a small child holding his father’s hand, unworried that the night is descending, that the way is long, that there is every danger on the way. Wild animals, thieves, robbers – he has no worry. He knows his father is holding his hand.
While the father is tense, in great anxiety, the child just by his side is enjoying every moment, not affected by his anxiety at all.
Are you the father who is holding the hand of the sannyasins?
Existence itself – a father is not of much help. That’s what the old religions have provided man, they have provided God the father. That is a small projection. The child had trusted the father, and now he is grown up; now he knows perfectly well that his father is fallible. When he was a child he knew his father was infallible. But now he is in a great dilemma; the father is fallible and he has become dependent on an infallible God.
This is the simple reason why every religion projected an infallible God, far above. Omnipresent – everywhere present – so you need not worry that he may not be seeing you. Omniscient – knowing everything, past, present, future – so you need not worry that he may bypass or may ignore something. Omnipotent – all powerful – he can do everything, there is nothing which is impossible for him.
The religions used the child’s psychology to create God the father. But it is a dangerous game. It means you are depending on a fiction. It means you are living in a dream world. It means your prayers are addressed to nobody; no answer is going to come.
Existence is there, surrounding you everywhere. There is no need for any theologian to prove that existence is. There is a great need to prove that God exists. Still nobody has been able to prove it. For five thousand years, philosophers, theologians, logicians have all been trying hard to prove the existence of God, but nothing is proved.
So I am not projecting anything, I am simply saying you exist. It does not need any proof. The trees exist, the sun exists, the moon exists, the stars exist, so many animals, men, women. No theologian has ever tried to prove that existence exists. Existence simply means “that which exists.” It needs no proof; it is solidly here, now.
So I am not in favor of projecting any imaginary thing, because if you live with an imagination you will never grow. You will remain a child. With God the father, you will remain a child, retarded. It is your retarded child’s need that a fiction of God is required. Without God the retarded child feels nervous, afraid; he does not know where to go, what to do. Nobody is there to take care of him, nobody is there to guide him, nobody is – all is darkness, and there seems to be no possibility of light.
But with God in heaven, the retarded child is perfectly happy.
Isn't there a danger that sannyasins project all these things onto the master?
I am continuously destroying their projections. As far as I am concerned, I am not allowing any projections. And this is being done for the first time. In the past, the so-called masters all allowed people to have all kinds of projections about them. It was a simple, logical thing: they were projecting God. The fiction of God was being projected by those so-called masters. The people had no acquaintance with God, but they knew the master, so they believed in the master.
To create such a belief, faith, masters have been doing things which are really ugly, things which may be right for a street magician, but are not right for a master. For example, all the miracles of Jesus either never happened and were created by his disciples after he was dead – because in no Jewish literature contemporary to Jesus… It is impossible to ignore such a man, he must have been big news. A man who walks on water – do you think contemporary literature can ignore him? Will a man who makes a dead follower come back to life again be ignored?
If these things are ignored, then what is news? Not a single mention of Jesus Christ, not even his name. So, most probably all those miracles were created by the followers, to make that man into a reliable representative of God. No ordinary man can walk on water – and he walks. Naturally, he has some direct relationship with the original source of life.
So, firstly they were most probably invented around all the masters of the world. And a few cunning people even managed to arrange them.

I know a man, a friend of mine, who was worshipped like a god. He did a small thing – he was traveling from Howrah station, and he entered the first class. He was a Mohammedan fakir. The ticket collector came, and asked for the ticket.
The fakir said, “I never travel with a ticket. I am a godman; everything belongs to me. Don’t waste my time – move on!”
This was simply insulting: a government servant doing his duty and you are without a ticket, and behaving in such an arrogant manner! The ticket collector also became adamant.
He said, “Get down from the train otherwise I will call the police. The train will not move until you get down. And don’t force me, because I don’t want a religious man to be arrested. Simply get out. I have nothing to do with you, but I am not going to allow anybody to travel in this train without a ticket – God’s man or not.”
The fakir said, “If you want me to get out, you will have to push me out. I am not going by myself.”
One thing led to another, and finally the conductor became angry and pushed the man out of the door, threw out his box, his bags. The fakir laughed and he said, “Now, you were saying that if I am inside the train the train will not move. Now listen to me. If I am outside the train, the train cannot move!”
A crowd gathered. And the driver was trying his hardest; the engineer was trying his hardest. Nothing seemed to be wrong, but the train was not moving. The guard was showing his flag, but the train was just standing there. By and by, all the passengers got out. There was a huge crowd, and the fakir was standing there with closed eyes.
The station master came running and he asked, “What is the matter?”
The conductor said, “Now, it is my duty…”
But the people in the crowd were so angry at the conductor that they were ready to kill him: “You insulted a man of God, and we are being unnecessarily delayed! Somebody has to attend court, somebody has to do some business, somebody has some appointment – who will be responsible for this?”
The crowd forced the conductor to give an apology. The fakir said, “Touch my feet, and remember, never misbehave with any man who seems to be religious and is traveling without a ticket.”
He had to touch the fakir’s feet. The fakir entered the train, and the passengers had to rush into their compartments because the train started moving. That made him famous to thousands of people: “This is divine power.” And it was nothing – he had bribed the conductor and the driver. Just two persons and a miracle is done, and he becomes a godman.

Now, it is possible that Lazarus was Jesus Christ’s friend. It could be very easily managed that his death was bogus, and Jesus brought him back to life. Lazarus was not the only person who had died in Jesus’ life. He was here for thirty-three years: in thirty-three years, thousands of people in Judea must have died. And if the man knew how to bring them back to life, then he was really cruel – knowing the secret and not bringing the people back to life. Why only Lazarus? – a friend who can conspire.
In that way, I am the first man not allowing my people to make me an object of any kind of projection. Many of them will feel hurt because of their expectations. It is a very complicated phenomenon; if I am a miracle man, then they are disciples of a miracle man. If I walk on water, then I am fulfilling their egos, too. And I am a totally different man – I would start drowning in the water! That would destroy their egos. And they would most probably run away from me, would never mention my name: that they were my followers, a man who drowned in the river.
Only people who are really ready to grow can remain with me. Thousands have come to me, but they all wanted some fulfillment of their egos from me. And that I cannot do. I cannot be a source of their retardedness, stupidity, superstition – no. Because I would not support them, they had to find some other master somewhere, who was ready to support them.
In fact, there have been moments when, without my knowing, they managed to project something. I came to know about it only later on. But the moment I knew it, I destroyed it completely.

A young man came one night. I had never seen him before; he was well educated. He told me, “My doctor has suggested coming to you and asking for a glass of water.”
I said, “But who is this doctor and why should he suggest me? Because I am not a doctor and I don’t treat patients.”
He said, “He told me that you would refuse, ‘But remain there, don’t leave.’”
It must have been nine o’clock at night. Until twelve he was sitting there in front of me. I said, “Okay, you can sit.” I continued my work, whatsoever I was reading.
I went on reading, and once in a while he would ask, “Why? I have to go four or five miles; my house is far away and my mother will be waiting.”
Because I was sick, my mother had come to visit me. She had gone to sleep, but seeing the light was on in my room and I was talking to somebody at twelve o’clock, she came out and asked what the matter was.
That young man just fell at my mother’s feet and he said, “Help me! I don’t want anything, just a glass of water.”
So my mother said, “Why don’t you give him a glass of water? And there is no problem in it, I will bring it.”
I said to her, “You don’t know. That glass of water can be very dangerous.”
She went in and brought a glass of water just to satisfy herself, otherwise she would get very upset: “What kind of compassion have you? He is simply asking for a glass of water. If it can help him, why should you hinder me?”
I gave it to the man, and as he drank the water, I could see his whole face changing. He touched his stomach and said, “My God, the pain has gone.”
He had been suffering from stomach pain for six months, and the doctor finally got fed up with him – because there was no pain, there was just something psychological. And the doctor knew me.
I had to tell that man, “It is good that your pain has disappeared. But be kind to me; don’t start talking about it to other people. Otherwise, there are so many sick people all around, and I don’t want to be surrounded by that kind of crowd.”
He said, “No, I will not say anything. Just do one thing: once in a while I will come with a bottle of water – just touch it, and I will do it.”
He cured many people!
And I told him, “I myself fall sick, and I have to call the same doctor who has sent you to me. I myself am drinking the same water. Can’t you see a simple thing?”
He was not willing to listen. He said, “I have experienced a miracle and not only in myself, I have seen the miracle happening in others. And you have just touched the water!”
It took me months to convince that man that it was just his mind: that there was no pain, that’s why the doctor had failed. Finally, I had to call the doctor and tell him, “Explain to him that the medicines were creating more trouble.” Because there was no pain, and he was continuously asking for medicines.
The doctor told him, “I sent you there because your thing was completely mental. You may have helped a few people, because almost ninety percent of people are suffering from diseases which don’t exist, which are in the mind.”

That’s why there are so many “pathies” in the world: allopathy, naturopathy, homeopathy, acupuncture, ayurveda. In every country there are many pathies. And the miracle is that they all work, and their working is totally different. Except allopathy, no pathy is scientific. But even allopathy cannot defeat those other pathies – they also cure people. Just ten percent of the people they will not be able to cure. But ninety percent of the people can be cured by any pathy, and these ninety percent are the people that allopathy will not be able to cure.
So, if you look at the figures, those bogus pathies are doing greater work than allopathy. Allopathy is certainly going to cure the ten percent; about the ninety it cannot be certain. But those other pathies certainly will not cure the ten percent, but they can manage the ninety percent.

I had a friend who was a doctor. Without any degrees, without any education in medicine, but if you count the people that he cured, he was a great physician. In his house – he was a bachelor and he lived alone – his lab was worth seeing. His lab was all bogus, there was nothing in it: test tubes, bottles, all kinds of colored water moving from one bottle into another bottle, and many kinds of beds and chairs, electrical chairs.
Seeing his lab, any sick person would be immensely impressed. He never took a stethoscope in his hand: he had invented a certain bed, you had to lie down on it. The stethoscope would be put on your chest, and above you there were two bottles of colored water. They would start jumping up and down because of the stethoscope. You would see them – and this man seemed to be a great scientist! And he would watch those colors, and that’s how he decided what kind of medicine was going to help you. And it was all water.
He was caught, because the medical profession would not allow him to do it.
I stood up for him in the court. I said, “It is not a question of whether he has a certificate or not. The man managed to save thousands of people from suffering. And you bother too much about a piece of paper: that he is not an MBBS. And all these MBBS’s who have filed the case against him, the reason is not that they are against him. The reason is that he is attracting patients, and they are all losing their business. They cannot compete with him; he is really such a genius.”
The magistrate laughed. He said, “What you are saying is right. I know this man, he has even cured me! But as far as the law is concerned, I have to prevent him from practicing medicine. And because I understand your argument – and my own experience is in his favor – I will not give him any punishment. Just he should not be a physician anymore.”
I told the man, “Don’t be worried. Move to another town, in a faraway place where people don’t know you. Take all your instruments and start again.” And he is still doing it!
And I told him, “Remember, as the medical profession becomes alert about you, change your place. You cannot remain in one place. They won’t let you. This time this magistrate has helped you. We don’t know if any other court will help you or not.”

I have been trying in every possible way, to destroy the projections. I don’t want my people to have faith in me. I want them to experience me; I want them to experience what I have experienced. I can show the way. I cannot walk for them; they will have to walk alone. I can give them encouragement, but I cannot give them the truth.
And the real function of the master is to give you encouragement. Just by his presence, his blissful life, peaceful life, he creates a certain milieu in which you can easily move toward dropping your plans, projects – and allow existence to happen.
So, what is happening in sannyas is not a doing on my part or on anybody’s part. It is a happening. And it has gone so beautifully. And it is going so beautifully. I don’t see that I can ever be disappointed, because in the first place I don’t bother whether the river is going to the north, or to the south. Wherever it goes, wherever it lands, that’s my home. That’s where I always wanted to go, but I was not aware of it.
Osho,
The modern age, the so-called “age of enlightenment,” is an age of liberalization from old belief systems and religions. You claim your religion to be a modern religion. Isn't this a contradiction in itself?
It is; it is a contradiction to call it a modern religion. Or better, a religionless religion, which will make the contradiction more clear. But to me, existence allows contradictions. It is not logical, it is very illogical. In fact, existence depends on contradictions. What are life and death? Are they not contradictory? But both are going to happen to one person, to the same person. In fact, a dead person cannot die. That would be consistent. If some dead person dies, it would be absolutely logical. But what happens is contradictory: a living person – life suddenly becomes death.
If you look into existence – and I am not a philosopher, I am simply existential; not even an existentialist, just existential. I see contradiction everywhere. Light cannot exist without darkness; darkness cannot exist without light. For example, ordinarily people think that a blind man must be living in darkness. They are wrong. A blind man knows nothing of darkness, because to see darkness you need eyes. If a blind man cannot see light, he cannot see darkness. They are two poles of one phenomenon; for both, eyes are needed.
Now, what the blind man experiences is something almost impossible to conceive. No light, no darkness. Then what? Is there something else that he feels? No. You must be thinking that a deaf person is enjoying continuous silence. You are wrong. A deaf person knows nothing of silence, because he knows nothing of sound. Sound and silence go together. Light and darkness go together. Everything – find anything and you can predict that there must be something polar opposite to it. Without the polar opposite, it cannot exist.
For example, men cannot exist without women. They are polar opposites, and that’s why they are so much attracted to each other. They are like positive and negative polarities of electricity. They are polar opposites. You have to understand the whole thing. First, they will be attracted to each other and they will be opposed to each other. This is the whole problem of all the couples in the world, of all the lovers in the world. They are attracted to each other, and the same is the cause of their continuous fight. They are the opposite of each other. That’s why homosexuals became known as gay people – they have no polarity. There is nothing to fight about. They are always smiling, they look really gay. But their gayness, their delight, is very superficial. It has not the tension of the opposites. The force is not there.
Have you ever heard any story about gay people which can be compared to the stories of Romeo and Juliet, Majnu and Laila, Siri and Farhad? Not a single love story exists about the millions of gay people who have lived on the earth. There was not the attraction to create a story; there was no conflict. In fact, a man loving another man simply loves his own mirror image. So, you can go on loving your mirror image. There is no trouble.
Lesbians have no trouble with each other. But these are mirror images. If you want excitement, you have to pay for it. If you want a tremendous experience of ecstasy and love, then you have to fight for it. It all comes in a single package. That’s why I am continuously contradicting myself. It is absolutely in tune with existence.
I call my religion, religionless religion. I call it religionless because it has nothing to do with all the religions which have existed up to now. To deny any connection with all those religions, I call it religion-less. But still I call it religion, because I also want to deny the atheists, the anti-religious. They were both part of the old game. The theist and the atheist were the polarity in the past. If I simply call this a religionless phenomenon, it becomes atheism. And it is not atheism. I want to insist that I am not a theist or an atheist. In fact, both are idiots. They are discussing something which does not exist. One is saying, “God is,” the other is saying, “God is not,” but both are concerned about God, and they are wasting their whole life arguing about God.
So, I am giving a new term: religiousness. It is no longer concerned with God, no longer concerned with heaven and hell, no longer concerned with all kinds of theologies or anti-theologies. It is a scientific search into your consciousness. But because it is a search into consciousness, I call it religion. I cannot call it simply science, because science is arrowed toward the objective reality. Religion is arrowed toward the subjective reality.
A scientist goes on working with all kinds of things, except for himself. In his lab he has done all kinds of experiments, but he has completely forgotten himself. He is the only one in his lab who has not even been touched by any experiment. Religion is experimenting on your own consciousness. So I use a slightly different word, just to make the distinction. Science experiments; religion experiences.
Science is objective, religion is subjective. Science is concerned with all that you can see, and religion is concerned with the one who sees. To make this distinction clear, I have to use a contradiction. There is no other way. Otherwise, I will be falling into something wrong, something which is not my approach.
Osho,
In Germany there are more sannyasins and more communes than in any other country. The critics say the reason is that the German soul is drawn toward the irrational, and longs for a leader. According to you, why is your religion, and why are you, so attractive to Germans?
The reason is simple. What the critics say is absolutely wrong. The reason is that Adolf Hitler has cheated Germany; deceived its youth, as nobody else has ever done to any country. They are so frustrated with political leadership, messiahs. Adolf Hitler was pretending to be a messiah. He thought that he was a reincarnation of the Old Testament prophet, Elijah. And in the Second World War, Germany saw something which no other country knows. Millions of people were killed, and the people of Germany were not aware what was happening. They were not aware that six million Jews were being gassed, and what they saw – the smoke from the chimneys of the concentration camps – was thousands of peoples’ lives becoming smoke.
Adolf Hitler cheated them by saying, “You are the people who are meant to rule over the world.” Of course, the people could not say that they were not responsible for supporting Adolf Hitler. They were as responsible as Adolf Hitler; it was a mutual thing. Adolf Hitler was giving them a great ego project – to conquer the whole world – and they were overjoyed that they had got a prophetic leader, a charismatic leader. For five years continuously he was winning, which made Germany feel, “Now there is no doubt at all.” The man went on being victorious, so more and more support came to Adolf Hitler.
But, finally, all such ambitious projects fail – sooner or later. Existence cannot support any such idiotic thing. Five years does not mean anything in existence, not even five seconds. So, Germany saw just a little dream, and the glory, and then the tremendous fall. It was almost as if Hitler had taken Germany to the top of Everest, and from there, the fall.
It has created two things in Germany – that’s why it now becomes my country. One, now no Adolf Hitler can deceive them. Enough is enough. No prophet, no messiah can deceive them, they have suffered too much. They know perfectly well that nobody is special – neither the Germans, nor the Italians, nor the English – nobody is special. The suffering that they have gone through, and the suffering they created for the whole world, at least proves one thing: that nobody is meant to rule over the world. And purity of blood is simply nonsense. You cannot tell whether a certain blood is German, English, Chinese, Hindu, Mohammedan – impossible. There are blood types, but they are not German, Italian, English. Blood is simply blood; there is no pure blood or impure blood.
So on the one hand, there is a tremendous frustration with Adolf Hitler and what he did to the country, and on the other hand, the guilt that they were also part of this stupid game. Now they want to get rid of all messiahs, and they also want to get rid of the guilt that they are carrying within themselves.
They have no alternative other than me, because every religion will create guilt. They cannot be freed from guilt; all religions are based on guilt. I am the only person who frees you from all guilt. There is no such thing as sin. There are mistakes, and to err is human. In fact, that is the only way to learn; there is no other way to learn.
So, I say to my people, commit as many mistakes as possible, just don’t commit the same mistake again – that is stupid, not sin. Committing the same mistake again simply means you are not watching what you are doing, you are not being intelligent. And you are not going to suffer in hell because of your mistakes; you will suffer in the mistakes themselves.
If you don’t commit a mistake, the reward is there. There is no need for a God, and a paradise, where all those people who did not commit mistakes will be rewarded. There is no need; each act brings its punishment, or its reward. And there is no need to feel guilt, because there is no idea of sin in my approach to life. Sin is the opposite polarity of guilt. If you have any idea of sin, then the idea of guilt is bound to be there.
No religion in the world can free the German youth from a tremendous burden of guilt. In fact, they will exploit it. And no religion in the world can make the German youth independent, free from all those saviors, prophets, messiahs – because they themselves are dependent on these people. It is a strange thing that I am the only person who can free you from messiahs, and who can free you from guilt.
Naturally Germany needs me, and I need Germany. Soon you will see that the whole of Germany will be my commune. Adolf Hitler has made the ground for me; that’s why I have a certain love for that man. Without him, my work in Germany would have been impossible. It is difficult in America because there has been no Adolf Hitler – just a poor Nixon!
Osho,
A few weeks ago a young woman who was very much interested in sannyas and very much afraid that she might became a sannyasin, said to me, “But I hate the personal cult around Osho.” I tried to explain to her that there was no personal cult, but I wasn't very successful. Can you help?
Just tell her that if she hates enough, she is already in love with me. She cannot escape. She can delay, but hate is already a relationship, and who wants to remain in a relationship of hate? It is not bothering me, it is bothering her. I don’t know about her, but her hatred will torture her. She will have to change it into love, only then will she be free of that torture. This is one thing.
The second thing: Bhagwan does not mean “God” or “personal God.” In fact, the problem has arisen because in India there are three religions, and these three religions have three different languages. Hinduism has Sanskrit as its language, Buddhism has Pali as its language, Jainism has Prakrit as its language.
Hinduism believes in a personal God. So when in Hindu scriptures the word bhagwan is used, it means a personal God. Buddhism and Jainism don’t believe in any God; they are God-less religions. So, when in Buddhist and Jaina scriptures bhagwan is used, it simply means “the blessed one.” That is actually the meaning of the word: the blessed one. It has nothing to do with God.
I am reminded of H. G. Wells, and his famous statement about Gautam Buddha. Buddha did not believe in God, but he was known to his disciples as “Bhagwan Gautam Buddha.” H. G. Wells was very puzzled when he was writing his world history, so he inquired, “What is this? – Gautam Buddha denies God, and his followers are calling him God. And he never denied it to his followers, that he should not be called God.” Then he came to know that in Pali, bhagwan means the blessed one, it has nothing to do with God.
In English there is only one word for God, in India there are many. The Buddhists don’t believe in God, they deny God – but to deny you have to use a word. The word that is used is ishwara. The Jainas also deny God. Naturally you have to use a word, so they use the word paramatma. Bhagwan is not used by either of those religions for God; it is used for the enlightened person. And it simply means, “One who has come to a fulfillment so deep, that there is nothing missing anymore.”
So, tell that woman that I myself don’t believe in any God, personal or impersonal. I am not a God, and she need not be worried about that. But I insist that I am certainly the blessed one. That I cannot deny, because that would be a lie. And my whole function is to make you also the blessed one. If I myself am not in that space, how I can lead you into that space?
Ask that woman, “Do you want to be ‘the blessed one’? Then there is no way other than falling in love with someone who is already the blessed one. Or, if you want to be ‘a miserable one’ you can go to the Vatican – the Polack pope is there – and be as miserable as you want.” So make it clear that it has something to do with self-realization; it has nothing to do with God at all.
Osho,
Many aspects of your commune and your vision are very similar, in my view, to Karl Marx's vision of the classless society, as there is no personal property, no money. Everybody gets what he needs; everybody works out of joy and creativity, and feels responsible for the whole; no politicians, no nations, et cetera, et cetera. Nevertheless, your commune feels totally different from any Marxist vision. The Marxists of today seem to be more afraid of you than any other people. Can you say a few words about that?
It is true. The Marxists have to be more afraid than anybody else, because the others are really fading out on their own accord. The real conflict – and the decisive conflict – is going to be between my red colors and the communist red flag. There is nobody else in the field. And their fear is natural, because they cannot condemn me on all these points.
So, everything that Karl Marx wanted – a classless society, a nationless world, and everybody according to his need – I am in perfect agreement with. What I am not in agreement with is that Karl Marx thought that consciousness is only a by-product of material things – chemistry, physics.
About that he is absolutely wrong. He had no right even to say that, because he had never meditated. He had never sat in silence even for one hour in his whole life, to look into what he is talking about. On what grounds does he say that? He pretends to be a scientific thinker; he calls his philosophy “scientific communism.” Now, that pretension won’t stand: if he is scientific, on what grounds does he say that consciousness is a by-product? He has to prove it in a scientific lab, mixing all the chemicals and things that a man is made of. And if consciousness arises, he has proved his point.
But he never entered any scientific lab in his whole life. He was sitting in the British Museum reading books on economics, politics, but he never knew anything about the Eastern ways of finding oneself. All he knew about religion was the Christian religion and the Jewish religion. He was a Jew.
Jews have contributed such great people to the world: Jesus, Karl Marx, Sigmund Freud, and they have all given as much insanity to the world as possible. These three people, this is the real trinity of the whole insanity of humanity. And the whole credit goes to the Jews – all three were Jews.
Karl Marx knew only about Judaism and Christianity, and both are third-rate religions. There is nothing, they don’t have any philosophic ground, their arguments are childish. Compared to the Eastern religions – Buddhism, Taoism, Jainism – they are simply in kindergarten. To condemn them is very easy; it does not need a great mind to condemn Judaism or Christianity, it is such a simple job. But to condemn Gautam Buddha is not a simple job. You will have to face the basic thing, meditation, because his whole structure is based on meditation. And meditation is not a belief; you have to experience it. So that is the trouble for the Marxist.
In India, Marxists were constantly coming in contact with me. They have written books against me. I seem to be more dangerous to them than anybody else, because nobody in the whole world – no religion – is capable of giving a counter-argument. They cannot prove the existence of God. They cannot prove that Jesus was born of a virgin girl. They cannot prove that Moses really saw God, or simply went mad roaming in the hot desert for forty years. Anybody can go mad; it is nothing special to Moses.
Forty years of wandering: hungry, thirsty, people dying, and he was responsible for all this, because he had promised the people to take them to the holy land. And there was no sign of it. People were dying – forty years is a long time, the original people who had started the pilgrimage had all gone by the time that he declared, “We have arrived at the holy land.” I can say with certainty that it was not the holy land he had arrived at, it was simply despair. “Now people cannot be deceived anymore, so this is ‘the holy land.’”
Israel is not worth anything. If Moses had stopped a little earlier, the Jews would have had all the oil in the world. Every Jew knows that he cannot forgive this fellow Moses! They passed all the oil fields and reached a place where there was nothing – and that was the holy land. Moses was God’s representative, and what kind of God would not say, “Moses, stop! This is the place.”
I don’t think he saw God. In the desert heat, forty years can drive anybody with so much responsibility, mad. And everybody was torturing him: “Where is the holy land?” People were dying; he was not able to arrange for their food and water. This man is part of the foundation of Judaism. He had no time to meditate; he had no time to create a scientific methodology about meditation. He had never heard the word meditation. All that he knew was prayer. Prayer presupposes God.
Communists are not concerned with Jews. All their religious doctrines can be very easily finished, there is nothing to it. And Jesus is just an offshoot of Judaism; he does not bring anything new to the world. He is simply repeating Jewish ideology. Even the Jews got fed up with this man: “He has nothing to offer, all that he says is to repeat the scriptures, which any rabbi can do in a better way.” He was uneducated, illiterate; any rabbi would have been far more philosophical, intellectual. And this carpenter’s son was declaring himself the only begotten son of the Jewish God.
Remember, it is the Jewish God. He has nothing to do with the Hindu gods; he had never heard of Hindu gods. He has nothing to do with any other God; his God is the Jewish God. Now, the Jews are angry, naturally: God giving birth to his only begotten son in a poor carpenter’s house? He was born in a stable – God could not manage a better place for the fellow? For his whole life he was riding on a donkey; God could not even manage a Rolls Royce for him. And the things that he was saying were nothing but old scriptures. He had to repeat those scriptures because he wanted to prove that he was the promised messiah of the Jews, that he had come to save the Jews.
The Jews could not accept it, it was simply insulting. This man is their messiah? And his whole following consisted of twelve fools! Those fools are called apostles.

When Jesus was crucified, they had all escaped. Only one remained there, and that one also denied that he knew Jesus – because people were looking at him and found that he seemed to be a stranger there, he did not belong to Jerusalem. They insistently asked, “Who are you?”
He said, “I have come to Jerusalem for a pilgrimage, and I have nothing to do with this man. I don’t even know anything about this man you are crucifying.” Eleven escaped, one denied – these were the followers.

So, it was very easy for Karl Marx to criticize Christianity and Judaism. But facing me, Karl Marx would be in difficulty – because I have the whole heritage of thousands of years of inner experimentation in the East. He would not be able to argue that consciousness is a by-product. He would have to prove it, because he says he is a scientific thinker. “Then why, on what grounds, are you accepting this as a belief – calling consciousness a by-product of matter?” In fact, modern physicists proved just the opposite: matter does not exist anymore.
Karl Marx is simply out of date. Absolutely out of date, because he was thinking that only matter exists and consciousness is a by-product. Now physics has come to the conclusion that matter does not exist. Then what does exist? Except consciousness, there is no other alternative left. Something certainly exists.
I was arguing with communists, and they were in difficulty. I proved that Marx is unscientific; he is simply an atheist believer. And a man who is not even scientific about the most important thing – consciousness – how can you rely on this man about other matters? In fact, on all other matters he was proved wrong. He had never thought that the revolution would happen in Russia. If somebody had suggested that revolution would happen in Russia, he would simply have laughed. He would not have conceived that revolution would happen in China. He thought that revolution was going to happen in a capitalist country like America – where it has not happened, and there are no signs at all that it is going to happen.
The Communist Party in America is the weakest party in the whole world. In all other countries the Communist Party is far stronger. In America – what Communist Party, what revolution? Here it should happen, because here the rich are super-rich, and the poor are super-poor. The distinction is vaster than anywhere else. Marx’s predictions have not proved right. Revolutions happened in poor countries like Russia and China.
And whatever Marx was thinking about the revolution and its after effects, nothing has proved right. He thought that once the revolution had happened, the country would not have any classes. It would take maybe five years, ten years. But seventy years have passed, and in Russia the classes still exist. Only their names have changed. The poor are still poor; in fact, more poor than in America. And the communists who are in power are more powerful than any rich man who has ever been in power. So there is a new class division, the powerful and the powerless.
In America there is a possibility – I say only a possibility – because at least one is free to express. In Russia there is no possibility for revolution. Marx could not be born in Russia; there was no way for anybody to say anything different from the government policy. The classes are there, and there is no sign of their disappearing; they are becoming more consolidated. Marx thought that those who were in power would soon decentralize power, but they go on centralizing power.
When Stalin died – and perhaps no man had that much power for that long a time, for almost forty years he was omnipotent. In Russia, at least, he was God, had all the qualities. His detectives made him omniscient; he was looking at everyone, watching everyone. People could not even talk to their spouses, because one never knew – the woman may be a detective or the husband may be a detective. People could not talk to their kids, because those kids belonged to the children’s Communist Party, and to prove themselves loyal to the country and to communism, they were telling their leaders everything that was happening in the family: what the father said, what the mother said. Wives had their own Communist Party; husbands had their own Communist Party. For the first time in history, everybody was completely surrounded. For the first time, walls were hearing you.
Such slavery. And Marx wanted that great freedom would happen. Marx was thinking that once rich people were no longer there, immense riches would suddenly fall from the sky. That has not happened; the Russian people are very poor people. So, communists are worried by me because I say they have only distributed poverty. And that is not my way.
I also want a classless society, but not enforced by a dictatorship – a classless society because people have so much money that nobody wants to hoard it. For example in a desert, if you have an oasis you hoard it. You have people on guard so that nobody takes the water; the water is scarce. But when enough water is available, there is no question of hoarding it. You don’t hoard water for tomorrow, because tomorrow the tap will be available. Money can be created, and to me, just as there are people who are born poets, born painters, born scientists, there are people who are born wealth creators. Not everybody is Henry Ford, and cannot be; not everybody can be a Rockefeller. And if you destroy Henry Ford, Rockefeller, Morgan and other people who continuously create wealth, the poor people will not become rich. They will be poorer than before, because the creators of wealth are gone.
I would like money to be respected in the same way that any other art is respected. Wealth should not be condemned; in fact, we should encourage people to become wealthier. I would like a classless society which is totally rich. Marx’s classless society is totally poor. I want it to be equal on the highest peak, and he wants people to be equal crawling on the earth.
My commune is working in that way.
Secondly, I respect the individual; Marx has no respect for the individual. Marx is utterly a socialist – society is important; all individuals can be sacrificed for the society. To me, that is not the case. On the contrary, every individual is so unique and valuable that he cannot be sacrificed for the nation, for the society, for ideology – no.
So my commune will be rich; it will have all affluence, abundance, but still individuals will be free. They will not be forced to be of equal size. Somebody prefers a Ferrari and somebody prefers a Mercedes – I don’t think that everybody should have a Ferrari whether he likes it or not! Individuals should be free. Not only about expressing their words, because all these things make your individuality. Your car is also part of you, your expression. Your dress is also part of you, your expression. Everything should be allowed to individuals, but things should be in such abundance.
For example in this small commune, where only fifteen hundred people are permanent residents, we have hundreds of cars, hundreds of buses, five airplanes; the whole commune is centrally air-conditioned. The commune tries to provide everybody’s need, whatsoever it is. Still, they are not cut equally – that your size should be equal, that everybody has to be six feet. Then those who are six feet five inches have to be cut, and those who are five inches less have to be given traction and lengthened! This is stupid.
To me, a classless society simply means that we give everybody an opportunity – an equal opportunity – to be himself. If somebody wants to live naked, in my society he will be allowed. In Russia, no. In China, no – in China he has to use a certain dress determined by the government. Nobody can even have the freedom to be naked. This kind of inhuman society is not my vision.
My vision is, people having so much that they can have anything they want. There is no need to hoard, because everything is always available. You can get it any moment you want. And still there will be differences. Somebody does not want to use a car at all, likes walking? Now, you cannot force a car on him, “You have to go in a car because it is an equal society and everybody has to be in a car.” People should be allowed their differences. All should be equally allowed to be themselves – and at the highest peak. That is why communists are very much against me.
In fact, all religions are against me, the communists are against me, the fascists are against me, the capitalists are against me. It seems only I am for myself, nobody else in the whole world!
Osho,
Can I add one last question?
Recently you have said all your sannyasins should join the commune. For me, that creates a problem. I have two very small children and a beautiful wife – she is not a sannyasin. We would like to live together with other sannyasins, but as the communes are now, we can't live together in a commune. So what to do?
Take the challenge and accept the trouble of it. Don’t choose the easier way. The easier way will be to live outside with your wife, with your children, because that is where you are. Nothing has to be changed. Moving into a commune will bring many problems, many of which you are not yet aware of. Your wife may fall in love with another sannyasin – most probably, she will do. You may fall in love with some sannyasin; in fact, you have already been thinking of it! So there are going to be troubles.
But my suggestion is, choose the way where there are troubles, because one grows through them, facing them, encountering them. In the outside world you will remain safer, more secure – a salary, a job, a position, a house. In the commune you have nothing. All that you have you pour into the commune’s pool. It is risky, but to take risks is one of the basic devices for growth.
Many kinds of new dimensions will open to you. For example, you think you have a very loving wife. Give it a chance – whether it is just an idea or a reality. If she is a very loving wife she will soon fall in love with somebody!
What about the children? They are really very small.
They will be part of the commune. That’s my approach toward children, that children should not be possessed by the parents. It is creating one thousand and one psychological difficulties for the children.
Humanity has not yet become aware that the family is one of the most criminal institutions in history, because it gives the child a very limited area of growth. The husband, the wife, the child: a very small area. And the child learns to depend on the father, on the mother. He learns their habits, learns their religion, learns everything from them. His learning is very linear; he is not rich in his learning. If the child is a boy he loves his mother, and hates his father. If the child is a girl she loves the father, and hates the mother. The mother is almost a competitor. You can see small girls flirting with their fathers, not knowing it is simply the way of nature, that he is the only man available.
If the family moves into a commune, and dissolves itself into a commune, the children have a tremendously vast scope; hundreds of uncles, hundreds of aunts. Every woman is different, every man is different. And the child will have the opportunity to learn from everybody.
You can give your love, but you should not possess the child. You should give him freedom to move, relate with as many people as possible. It is one of the greatest problems for psychologists, that no man ever finds a woman who is totally satisfying. Neither does a woman ever find a man who is tailored just for herself. The coat is always either loose or it is too tight, because it is not tailored for you. The boy raised in a family unconsciously gets continuously conditioned by the mother. In his unconscious, an image of the mother becomes so deeply impressed that his whole life he will try to find a woman who is exactly his mother. But that is impossible. Existence never repeats. So, whenever he falls in love, it is only a part of the woman that resembles his mother, but it is always only a part.
So, when you are just having a love affair everything goes good, because something in you resembles the father of the girl, something in the girl resembles your mother. On the beach, in the garden, it is good – you are both at your best. But when you get married and you have to live together twenty-four hours a day, then it becomes troublesome, because you cannot pretend that the whole is only that part with which you were in love.
The whole is far bigger, and when the whole starts showing it – and it happens from both sides – the woman wonders that she never knew this man, she could not have conceived that this man will be like this. The man could not have conceived that this woman would throw tantrums and pillows and scream every night, and the neighbors would come. And even if you are right you have to apologize, otherwise she goes on screaming and crying. You had never thought about this. On the beach she had never behaved like this!
No couple in the whole world fits absolutely, and the reason is the family. If a child is raised by the commune, then he will not have a fixed image, he has known so many women. One day he sleeps with one aunt, another day with another aunt, once in a while he sees his mother, too. Once in a while, his father. Otherwise, there are so many uncles and everybody is loving to him. He never gets impregnated with one idea. He has a very vague sense of womanhood, not of a particular woman. The same is true about the girl: she has a certain idea of what it means to be a man, but she has no fixed picture.
There will be no disappointment in their lives because they will be more flexible, they will be more adjusting. And they will be able to cope with new realities that may be coming, because they have seen so many people that they know that people are different. And they don’t have some picture to compare with. They can love more. They can accept even difficult parts of the other person, and they will never be angry with their parents.
Otherwise, every boy remains angry with his father because the father was the person who was making love to his mother. He was the hindrance; otherwise he would have been the lover. That’s what he wanted. But the father was always there and was stronger and bigger and more powerful, so he had to repress himself.
No girl ever forgives the mother because she was always there. And as the girl grows, comes of age, the mother is continuously watching whether the father is taking too much interest in the girl, or the girl is taking too much interest in the father. And she is continuously cutting in, and creating barriers between them. The girl cannot understand. She cannot be forgiving, she will always be angry.
In a commune, the child will not have any anger against the father or the mother. In fact, his experience of richness will be vast, because a commune is already a world. For a child, five thousand people are enough of an experience. With this experience, he will enter into the world. He will not need God the father; he will not need the priest – the father. He will be independent enough, because he was never dependent on the father or the mother. He was not dependent on anyone. To belong to a commune means he was independent, he was not dependent on anybody. So he has been nourished and nurtured into freedom. And that should be the new man.
So my suggestion is, take the risk. And help other sannyasins who are outside the commune, to also move to the commune – because only in a commune will you have a real experience of sannyas. Outside, you cannot have. The world is rotten, simply a graveyard. Drop all the security of the world, the safety of the world, and take the risk.
And don’t be afraid. Just look at me – not a single cent.

When I resigned from the university, my father started crying. He asked, “What are you doing?”
I said, “From this moment, I want to live totally with existence. If existence wants me to be hungry, I will be hungry and thankful.”
He said, “You have always been difficult. Now you have taken the most dangerous step.”
I gave all my property to the other children, because I told him, “I don’t want any inheritance – because when I refused your religion, which was my inheritance; when I refused your party politics, which was my inheritance; how can I accept your money, your house, your lands, your garden? That will be very insincere of me. So I cannot accept, because I have rejected everything else. And if I accept only the money, I don’t receive anything from you. Your love, your blessing is enough.”
So he had distributed all the money and he said, “You should have told me a few days before. I would have kept a part reserved for you, for any time you are in difficulty.”
I said, “I will never be in difficulty. Nowhere will I be in difficulty, for the simple reason that I know how to love, and that’s enough. I can take any risk, I can jump into any challenge, because I know how to love. I know how to trust.”

And it is such a tremendous joy to discover every day that you are still here, with not a single cent. I must be the poorest man in the whole world.
You don't look like!
I live like an emperor, because what can a poor man lose? I live like an emperor. Even an emperor is worried about losing land, money, this and that. I don’t have anything, so I can live as no emperor has ever lived, without any anxiety. But the fact is that I am the poorest man in the world. Even beggars have their accounts.
So don’t be worried, just take a jump. And next time you come here, bring your loving wife.

============================================================

Questline, CJOR Radio,
Vancouver, Canada

Glad to see you.
Osho,
Good evening.
In one of the talks I heard, you were talking about a merging of Zorba and buddha, an aligning of the spiritual and the material. Can you please define enlightenment for me?
It simply means becoming aware of yourself. Ordinarily, a man is awake to everything around him, but is not aware who is awake and aware of all the things around. So we remain on the periphery of life, and the center remains in darkness. To bring light to that center, consciousness to that center, is what enlightenment is.
It is just being absolutely centered in yourself, focusing all your consciousness upon yourself, as if nothing else exists. Only you are.
Your own enlightenment came at the age of twenty-one?
Right.
And you likened it to an atomic explosion. You said it was like a light that never left you. How would your perception then, being enlightened, differ from people that have not awakened to their own enlightenment?
Just as, when a person is asleep, how are you going to define the difference between the person who is asleep and the person who is awake? The person who is asleep is dreaming, or not dreaming, but one thing is certain, he is not aware that he is asleep. The man who is awake, whatever he is doing one thing is certain, he is aware that he is awake.
This is the only difference on the spiritual level, too. A spiritually asleep person is not aware that he is asleep. And a spiritually awakened person is aware that he is awake. And, of course, he is aware of all those who are asleep.
The awakened person has two definite positions: first, that he is aware; second, that all others who are around him are asleep. But the sleeping person has neither of these two. He is not aware that he is asleep, and he is not aware that others around him are asleep.
What is blocking the awakening in most people?
Just a continuous flow of thoughts.
I'm sorry?
A continuity of thoughts, which is functioning as a barrier – that is the layer that keeps you unaware. Either you are thinking about the past, or you are thinking about the future. But neither the past exists nor the future. And between these two is the very small gap of the present, which you go on missing. That is the point where awakening happens.
That small gap, I make equivalent to an atomic gap – the smallest possible gap. It slips away so quickly, that if you are not completely free from thoughts you are going to miss it.
Osho,
I saw some deer here, and they were obviously very much in this moment. Is man's intellectual mind the baggage that we're carrying around, which blocks our own awareness?
That is the only mind you have. And the deer are not aware of the present; it is you who are thinking that they are aware of the present. They are not. They are neither aware of the present, nor are they aware of the past, nor of the future. They don’t have any thought process.
It is man’s prerogative to be aware of the past, to be aware of the future. And, if he makes effort, then there is a potential in him to be aware of the present. No animal can become enlightened.
Every man has the potential to become enlightened. If he does not become, he is responsible – nobody else is responsible for it.
When you talk about enlightenment and being in this present moment, surely there must be planning for the future? There must be a certain amount of planning that's gone on around Rajneeshpuram?
I have not planned anything.
Well, the people around you have.
They are asleep, and they are free to plan.
Which brings me to my next question.
They are sound asleep and doing great things! I am the only person who is not doing anything.
Well, you're enlightened.
Because I cannot afford to dream, and to project, and to do. They can afford it; they are asleep.
Osho,
When I hear you say that – in terms of my model of society, and my framework of reference to the society that I've been brought up in, if everyone were truly awakened, what type of society would it be? There has to be planning – but can you plan in the nowness of this moment for the future?
If everybody is awakened, there will be no planning and there will be no need for planning. People will function spontaneously. For example, I have never planned my life. I don’t know what I am going to say in the next sentence. You will ask a question, and my response will be there, but it is not prepared, no planning has gone into it.
So, if everybody was enlightened we would have a totally different world, almost inconceivable now. You will not have atomic weapons, you will not have war; you will not have crime, you will not have courts. You will not have politicians, you won’t have saints, popes. They will all disappear. You will have very innocent, simple, but joyous people all around. They will be doing things, but they will be very simple things, not complicated – nothing like nuclear weapons. They will make houses, but they will not have architecture and schools for architecture. They will do whatsoever is needed simply, without getting deeply into details. They will start a thing without knowing where it is going to end.
That’s how I have lived without planning all these three decades; not knowing anything about tomorrow. But everything has gone perfectly well. In fact, I cannot conceive that it could have been better.
How many enlightened beings are there, at this point in time?
I don’t know. There is no way of knowing.
Do you think the experience of enlightenment for other individuals would be the same as it was for you – that atomic explosion you referred to?
Not necessarily.
So it's a very individual situation?
It is very unique, and very individual.
And that's why it's so difficult for someone like yourself to explain what it is?
I am explaining it.
Yes, but it's still difficult.
And I am explaining it better than anybody else has ever explained it!
You've written…350 books have now been published on the subject.
I have not written a single book.
Osho,
Let's talk about how to get to enlightenment, or how to become awakened to your enlightenment. I've read some of your work, and you say that there's two ways to do it: the alone route, through meditation; and the other, through relationships.
Would you talk about the subject of relationships, please, because in North America particularly we have a good track record of relationships coming and going, coming and going. And I don't see that awakening that you were talking about!
The basic thing is meditation. But meditation can happen in two ways: either it can happen in your absolute aloneness, unrelated to anybody – you can move inward in your silence. Just sitting there watching your thoughts moving, as you watch, you become aware of a strange phenomenon, that the gaps between thoughts are becoming bigger and bigger. The thought process is no longer as thick as it was before.
Just a few days of sitting silently, doing nothing, no interference with thoughts, no judgment about them, whether they are good or bad, just as if sitting by the side of a river and the river flows by – but the strange experience comes to you, that the more you are watchful, the less are the thoughts. As your watchfulness grows higher, your thoughts go on becoming less and less and less. A moment comes when your thoughts are nil and your awareness is full. It is exactly proportionate: one hundred percent awareness means zero thoughts; one hundred percent of thoughts means zero awareness.
So, either it is possible in your aloneness, or it is possible in your relationship. In relationships, particularly in moments when you are making love, meditation is very easy, because the very experience of making love brings you to a point where thoughts stop.
You are referring to the orgasm?
Yes, when thoughts stop and you are simply there, experiencing the thrill. If you know that this moment can be transformed into meditation, then this is the simplest way. Rather than sitting under a bo tree for six years, it can happen in your bedroom – there is no need to go into a forest – and far more easily, because you are following a natural course. Your biology will support you, your physiology will support you, your woman will support you. Everything will be supportive. You just have to be alert that when orgasm happens, don’t get lost in it. Remain a witness, remain a watcher.
So the whole thing is simple, but that is the difficult point. In relationships, the difficult point comes because in orgasm you are feeling so pleasant, so blissed out, that you will tend to forget your awareness.
You're talking about getting attached to the experience?
Getting lost into the experience, not attached. Attachment is a different thing. Getting lost, getting drowned in the experience. You should not get drowned in the experience. Your physiology is in it, your biology is in it, your chemistry is in it, but you are not. You are not. Just a watcher. So in your bedroom there are three persons, or even four.
Hopefully four! Are you talking about the eternal part of the eternal being, as being the witness?
That is the witness.
Could you expand a bit on attachment, getting attached? How attachment can also provide a blockage for awakening.
You just become immediately unconscious. The whole thing is to be conscious. The moment you become attached, the moment you become one with the experience, you lose consciousness – which will be a natural tendency. Millions of people know the experience of orgasm, but they don’t all become enlightened. For the simple reason, the natural tendency is that when there is such a blissful moment, who wants to be a witness? That will be missing the point in a way. You will be standing away – and when the experience for which you have been hankering your whole life is happening.
And it is a very small moment. It is not going to continue for hours so that you can also be there, you can get into it and get out. There is not time. It is very momentary, very atomic. The natural tendency is to be drowned in it. That’s why many people come very close to enlightenment but miss by just a single step.
Let me interrupt you here. When you say “merging into the experience,” is that different from you hear a lot of talk about a “oneness,” “being at one with all”? Are you differentiating between those two?
They are different things.
Could you just expand on that? How that would be different?
Being one with all, is a by-product of becoming a witness. It comes as a shadow to it; it does not precede it. Merging into an experience precedes it. And if you are merged into an experience, then you are in the state of a drunkard. It may be love, it may be anything, but you are drunk. You are not alert, aware. And when I say “becoming one with the whole,” that is not in your hands. That comes as a reward of being a witness.
What you can do is to be a witness. There, your doing ends. More than that, man cannot do.
So, an enlightened person like yourself, you would never react to anything? If I got angry and jumped up and down, or swore at you, you would not react? You would act, would you?
No, I would respond. I would not react. Reaction is impossible. Reaction is always unconscious, and response is always conscious.
For example, Jesus says, “If somebody hits you on one cheek, give him the other too.” Being a Christian, if I hit you on one cheek, you may remember Jesus’ statement and you may give me the other cheek. This is reaction. You are not responding to the moment. Your mind is reminding you what has to be done, what is right to do. This is the moment when you can prove that you are really a Christian. All these things will not take much time – just in a flash. That will be reaction. Response is unpredictable.
It's not conditioned?
No, it is not conditioned. It is unpredictable because it is not Christian, it is not Hindu, it is not Buddhist. It is my individuality. So even I cannot say what I will do if you get angry.
Osho,
Do you have a master-disciple relationship with the people here?
No, they are all my friends.
Where do you draw the line between love and idolatry? Can you differentiate between these two? There's a lot of love toward you, but is there a point where love can go over to sort of idol worship?
That is love going wrong, love moving in a wrong direction. Adoration is not love: you have put somebody on a high pedestal, and that is not an act of love. It has its consequences. If you adore somebody and put somebody higher than you, you are bound to put somebody lower than you. You would like to be adored by somebody. It is an organic phenomenon.

It happened: I was meeting one of the shankaracharyas, the Hindu popes. He was sitting on a high platform, and, just by his side on a smaller platform, another Hindu monk was sitting.
He introduced me, saying, “Do you see who this man is, sitting by my side?”
I said, “I don’t know him.”
He said, “He has been the chief justice of the Supreme Court of India. But he is so humble that he never sits on the same platform that I am sitting on.”
I said, “I can see that.” He had a smaller platform.
But I was sitting on the floor. And I told that chief justice of the Supreme Court, “You should dig a hole in the earth here, and sit there, because I am sitting here. What kind of humbleness is this?”
And I told the shankaracharya, “He is simply waiting. The moment you fall into your grave, he will jump on your platform. And there is a third sannyasin sitting on the floor; he will jump on his platform. This is simply a hierarchy. And you call it humbleness? Neither you are humble nor he is humble. You are fulfilling his ego by calling him the most humble person.
“And what is the need to remind me that he is a retired chief justice of the Supreme Court of India? What is the need? He is a sannyasin now, he has renounced the world – but he has not renounced the retirement. He has not yet forgotten that he was the chief justice of the Supreme Court. Do you recognize the fact, that your saying this is simply fulfilling your ego too? – That you don’t have ordinary disciples? Calling him humble, you fulfill his ego. And he, refusing to sit on the same platform as you, fulfills your ego. This is a mutual conspiracy. You are each other’s enemies. You are destroying each other, without knowing what you are doing; you are poisoning.”

Adoration is dangerous. Anybody who adores somebody, would like in the wake of it to be adored by somebody else. Otherwise, it is impossible for him to adore somebody – that would be only one pole. Where is the other pole? A polarity is needed.
In love there is no hierarchy. Nobody is higher than you; you don’t require anybody to be inferior to you. There is no question of equality, either. When there is nothing higher and nothing lower, the very question of equality becomes irrelevant. Everybody is himself.
Originally, I asked that because some people look at you as a guru, and feel that they can see themselves through you, that you can mirror them to themselves.
That is their fault.
Is that a fault?
Certainly.
Would you expand why that would be a fault, if they…
Because I am nobody’s guru.
You don't have a capacity to mirror me back to myself?
I have the capacity to mirror, but no mirror needs to be a guru.
I'm sorry?
In your bathroom you have a mirror. Is that mirror your guru?
No, no! I'm just asking a question.
Then what is the point? A mirror is just a mirror. There is no need to make a guru out of it. It is its nature: just because it is a mirror, it reflects. There is no need to bow down and touch the feet of the mirror, and put the mirror on your head and move around the world saying that you have a guru because it mirrors you! There is no need.
Yes, I can mirror. You have only to open your eyes. Otherwise, what can the mirror do? You can stand before the mirror with closed eyes. The mirror will still be reflecting, but a man with closed eyes. The man will not know that he is being reflected, he will not know that there is a mirror. The mirror will be doing its function; it is nothing on the part – in fact, the mirror is not doing anything, it is just the nature of the mirror. If you are not there, and a dog is standing there, he will be mirrored.
Osho,
Let me get to some of your quotes that are out in the press: the one where you say there is no God. Could you expand on that? Are you saying that there is no God outside of creation, per se?
Certainly I am saying that there is no creator. Creation itself is enough unto itself; it needs no outside agency to create it. The moment you accept an outside agency to create it, you fall into a vicious circle, because the reasoning is, “How can existence be there without being created by someone?” That is the reasoning of all the religions. If you accept their reasoning, then the question arises: “Who created God?”
And, if God can be there without being created, then what is the problem? Then existence can be there without being created. You accept principally that something can be there without being created, so why unnecessarily go from A to B, from B to C? Those are all hypotheses. God A creates God B, God B creates God C – unnecessarily. The whole of theology is simply nonsense. It begins with God – theo means “God.” And logy means “logic about God” – that is a contradiction in terms.
So creation itself is God. We're God, you're God, I'm God, everybody here is God. The whole game is God.
Yes, if you want to use the word God.
Or source.
There is no problem – there is no problem for me. But then you will have to change the meaning, because the donkey will be God, even the yonkey will be God. Better to drop that word, because that word is dangerous. Then, sometimes if you are riding on a donkey you are riding on a god. Sometimes you are…
I guess the force that gives us life or whatever it is – energy.
I would like to call it pure consciousness, just consciousness. Or, if you are too attached to the word God, call it godliness. But don’t make it a noun, make it a quality. Godliness is perfectly okay.
Why do you say make it a quality rather than a noun?
Because the moment you make it a noun you kill it. The moment you make it a noun you stop its growth. Nouns don’t grow, only verbs grow.
You're saying the verb is dynamic?
Yes.
So you see God – as brought across by the Christian world here – as outside of creation, as being a stumbling block to being in the nowness of this moment – is that what you're saying?
Right.
Is that why you have also been quoted as saying that “Jesus was at best a madman” – I'm paraphrasing here – and that you could “find another in any mad house”? Is that why you seem to be recently pushing all other religions per se out of the way? – Because of this attachment, that it's keeping people out of the moment?
That is one of the reasons. There are a thousand and one more reasons.
Well, share a couple with me!
Jesus would be a crackpot even if he accepted that there is no God – that would not make much difference.
Why?
Because there have been people like Gautam Buddha who does not believe in God, still he makes the same kind of statements as Jesus is making – and I will also call those statements mad. For example, the story is – just as it is in Jesus’ case, who declares himself the only begotten son of God – Buddha cannot say that, because there is no God in his ideology. But he declares, “I am the suprememost awakened person.” That is equivalent to God. Why should you be the suprememost? Past, present, future; Buddha is the suprememost enlightened person. Nobody can go higher than him. If I meet him I’m going to kick him. He is a crackpot.
This type of person – he does not believe in God, but he puts himself in God’s place – he is in fact even worse than Jesus Christ. At least Jesus Christ is only the begotten son of God. He does not claim himself to be God. Krishna claims himself to be God. Now, Krishna is a bigger… All these people need psychiatry.
Hmm. You also say that Jesus was suicidal.
Yes, he was suicidal.
The reason I am laughing is that I'm thinking of getting Jerry Falwell on my show, following yours. I'm sort of running through my mind what sort of reaction this would make.
Jesus is in many ways trying to prove that he is the awaited messiah of the Jews. And that is the whole conflict between the Jews and Jesus. Jesus was never a Christian, you have to remember that. He was born a Jew, he lived as a Jew, he died as a Jew. He never heard the word Christian. It was only after three hundred years, when the Bible was translated into Greek, that messiah became christ, and the followers of Christ became Christians. This is a three hundred year, later development.
Jesus was continuously emphasizing that he is the awaited messiah, and not a single rabbi was convinced of it. Those twelve fools that he convinced – who became his apostles – were all illiterate, poor people: fishermen, woodcutters, farmers, who had no idea of what he was talking about. They were simply happy that they were the followers, the chosen few, of the only begotten son of God. Something was wrong with their psychology too. They were becoming special without any cause, and they were raising Jesus as high as possible – because with Jesus they go on rising higher.

The night Jesus was caught, you will be surprised that his disciples asked him, “Lord, now you will be gone, how long will it take for you to come back and take us?”
He said, “Soon I will be coming back in glory, with God’s light, and I will take you all. I am going to prepare places for you.”
They said, “One more question: of course you will be on the right side of God – who amongst us twelve will be by your side? Who will be second to you?”
They wanted to decide the hierarchy. This type of gathering cannot be sane. These people would be perfectly right if they were in politics.
Not to defend it, but Jesus himself didn't write any of that, his own thoughts.
Nobody has ever written.
It was filtered through other people, the disciples particularly, and I am wondering if you are not being a bit harsh – because let's suppose…you have now had 350 books published, and even then, when it's there in writing and your thoughts are there, and you're talking in an analogy at times to get the real message across – people must get behind what you're saying, or people just take things literally. And I think that misinterpretation has happened in Christianity, hasn't it?
Let me explain to you: it is not only about Christianity – Buddha has not written anything, Mahavira has not written anything, Krishna has not written anything. No founder of any religion has written anything. They have all spoken, so everything was written by others. But as far as Jesus is concerned, it is more probable that he said it than Krishna or Buddha or Mahavira, because there are four gospels – in fact, five: five disciples writing almost exactly the same thing, without any contradiction. It is enough proof that it has come from the same source, that the person has said something like that, because it is reflected in all the five gospels in almost similar words.
There has also been a lot of talk that over two thousand years the Bible has been changed by the church itself. There is talk about references to reincarnation having been taken out.
That is true, that is true. The church has changed it. But fortunately one gospel has remained outside the church. It is the gospel of Thomas, on which I have spoken. I’m the only man in two thousand years who has spoken on something which has remained outside the church, because the church accepted those four gospels. Thomas was not there. He was in India, so his gospel remained in South India. But that gospel exactly repeats what the other four gospels say – of course more accurately, more exactly and more significantly. The churches may have done something, but they have not messed about so much, because there is an independent source to compare with.
As far as Jesus is concerned, it is very difficult to defend him on this ground – that these were perhaps not his words. These were certainly his words.
Osho,
Do you find any redeeming features in the other religions – Buddhism, Hinduism, Christianity?
Christianity, Judaism, – these religions have nothing to offer except stupidity. Buddhism, Taoism, Jainism have much to offer. Hinduism is just in the middle of these two – much nonsense, much sense, all mixed. What Buddhism, Taoism, Jainism have to offer in essence, is the method of meditation. Those are the three religions which are based on the method of meditation. All three have no idea of God. All three are completely free of this father figure, which is really a projection of child psychology – you need a protector, you need somebody to create, you need.
Those three religions are more mature. The contribution is the same. Their methods of meditation may be a little bit different – I have tried all their methods – but they reach to the same conclusion. They are all existential, experiential. They are not theoretical, and they are not based on belief. They don’t require you to believe anything. Their approach is very scientific. So those three religions have offered one thing, which is all that is needed. They have offered many more things which are rubbish. And it is very difficult for someone, unless he himself has meditated and experienced the space, to find from the whole garbage…
For example, Buddhism has as many as thirty-three thousand scriptures, and each scripture has hundreds of commentaries on it, and then commentaries on commentaries. It is said that if all the literature on Buddhism in India, in Tibet, in China, in Japan, in Korea, in Sri Lanka could be accumulated, then you could put all the books of the whole world on one side, and still the books on Buddhism would be weightier – just in weight.
You claim to have the only religion, though.
I claim to have the first and the last religion, for the simple reason that except meditation I have nothing else. So I have found the very essential core. No garbage around it, nothing non-essential, just a simple methodology. And I have looked into all the methods of meditation – there are 112 methods.
I have spoken on the 112 methods of meditation. And out of 112 methods that have been practiced in the East by these three religions, I have chosen one essential point that connects all those 112 methods. They differ only in small details, but their basic foundation is witnessing.
Osho,
I'd like to move on, if I might, to your relationship with your neighbors here in Oregon. You're quoted at one time as saying that you are disappointed: “I always loved the American constitution and now I think it would have been better if I had not come here as I am feeling absolutely disappointed. That constitution is bogus. The words freedom, individualism, capitalism, freedom of expression, are all just words.”
You seem to have the protection here, though. You have been able to put this oasis in very arid land. Why would you say you are disappointed in the constitution?
Because it is a question of degrees. I have respected the American constitution more than anybody else in the whole world – Americans included – because I have respected the constitution as the only democratic constitution in the world. Hence my disappointment. I would not have been disappointed in the Soviet Union, because I had no respect for their dictatorship in the first place. If they had even killed me, I would have accepted it as a matter of course.
But I cannot accept any nonsense here in America, because of my respect for the constitution, my respect for the words democracy, freedom, individuality, respect for the individual. We have created this oasis, not because of the American government, but in spite of the American government. They are creating every kind of hindrance, they are making every kind of trouble, and they are absolutely illegal. What they are doing is unconstitutional; it is against their own constitution. That’s why I say that…
But the constitution is really that which will eventually protect your rights. I know that the government – which is people – has been causing you problems here. But I just thought the choice of the words, “the constitution here”…that is the protection, that is the umbrella, ultimately.
Wait a moment! – That’s why I will protect the constitution.
You're doing that?
Not the constitution; the constitution is a dead thing. What can the constitution do for me? I will do something for the constitution. I am going to fight for the constitution, against the Americans who are prostituting it.
Osho,
Why do you think the neighbors around here have been so disturbed about your moving in?
It would have been the same anywhere.
Anywhere?
Anywhere.
Why?
For the simple reason that man is an animal, has come from animals, has a territorial imperative. It is their territory and we are strangers. And you will be surprised to know that even in India where I was born, I was a stranger – because I did not believe in their traditions, I did not believe in their conventions, I did not support their religions, I did not support their values. I was a stranger in India too, and the Indian neighbors were as much against me as the Oregonians. So the Oregonians are not doing anything special.
But why are people reacting this way? Why do they feel threatened by your presence here?
It is not a question of my presence. Why was Jesus crucified by the Jews? Why was Gandhi assassinated by the Hindus? Why were many attempts made on the life of Buddha? It is a simple thing to understand. That’s why I’m not angry about it, I accept it as part of man’s animal nature. I am a constant threat to them.
For example, my people are happy, rejoicing, dancing, enjoying. And those Oregonians around me look sad, bored – as the whole world is bored and sad. And everybody is feeling cheated by life; nobody seems to find contentment. Nobody is able to rejoice in life. And suddenly they see a few strangers coming here and enjoying, for no reason at all; trying hard, working twelve and fourteen hours a day and changing the desert. And in four years we have changed it. Now we are self-supporting, self-sufficient for our food, our vegetables, for our milk. And this is when everything is being done against us.
We are fighting in every court. We must have the biggest law firm in the world – four hundred legal experts. Here, four hundred sannyasins are continually working to fight unnecessarily in so many courts. We are winning in every case, and they know that finally we are going to win. But they can delay at least, they can harass at least – and this is human nature.
So I’m not angry about it, and I don’t think that it is anything unexpected. But as far as America is concerned, my expectations were higher than about any other country. It is a new country, only three hundred years old. It should be more fresh; it should be more capable of existing with new ideas, new people. But they are behaving just as idiotically as the Indians.
India is an old country, almost dead. I was not disappointed with the Indians. They made attempts on my life, and I was not disappointed even in that. But with America I have a certain love affair.
Do you see the possibility of reconciling your differences with the neighbors around here?
That depends on them. I never compromise on any point. Either I am right or I am wrong. If they can prove me wrong, I am perfectly willing to be with them. Or I am ready to prove them wrong, then they have to be with me. I don’t compromise on any point. Compromise is only for impotent people.
You are also quoted somewhere… You said, “If they would hate us” you could deal with hate, because you could transmute that into love.
Yes, that is true.
But you can't stand being ignored.
That’s right.
But from the outside, you've hardly been ignored by the press. I mean since you broke silence.
They cannot ignore, and I will not allow them to ignore.
Expand on that a bit more. You say “We can't stand being ignored.” You're not being ignored. What did you mean by that?
I mean by that, that whatsoever the media is doing right now is not according to my standards. Although my commune is small, it is a worldwide phenomenon. We have communes all over the world, even in East Germany – even in Soviet Russia. Of course they are underground.
They're not wearing red and orange, you say?
They cannot.
Red has become my monopoly. I have taken it away from the communists.
So expand on that a bit more. You're disappointed in the news coverage that you've been getting?
Yes, it is nothing. Much more is needed, and we will bring it.
So you don't mind whether it is sensationalized?
That does not matter.
As long as you're getting coverage?
Anything will do. That we can manage.
Osho,
You predicted the start of the apocalypse, a ten-to-fifteen-year period of transformation here on earth. It was supposed to start in ‘84. Has this started, and what can you point to, to say that it's started?
Just creating gossips – don’t bother about these things.
Huh?
That’s my way of not being ignored. I can predict anything, without any trouble.
You can predict anything?
Yes.
Well has it happened? ‘Cause I think in ‘83 you said it was going to start in ‘84.
It is not going to happen.
It's over. We're in the new age!
I don’t take life seriously.
Osho,
That's fine with me.
I'd like to take a quote from the Osho Times regarding AIDS, which I know that the entire community here is quite concerned about. And, I might add, is dealing with, I think, more realistically than the outside world: “AIDS is the ultimate development of homosexuality. It has no cure. You have gone so far away from nature that there is no way back. You have broken all the bridges behind you. That's the disease AIDS.”
Could you expand on that statement?
That’s exactly right.
Jerry Falwell says that that is God's revenge on the homosexuals. Are you saying that homosexuality has moved that far away from nature – not God but nature – that it is nature coming back at the homosexual community?
God himself is a homosexual. First make it a point. The Christian trinity has not a single woman in it; it is a gay company. If anybody has to suffer from AIDS, it is your God first.
Why did you say “your” God?
Because you are quoting somebody.
I'm quoting you!
No.
Oh, Jerry Falwell.
Yes.
No, I said: “How does that differ?” I was asking you…
It is absolutely different, because he is again trying to create fear in people. He’s not giving a factual analysis of the disease. Let me give you an example. There was an earthquake in Bihar, in India, and Mahatma Gandhi said that the earthquake happened because God was punishing the sinners. I was very young, but I wrote him a letter: “It is very strange that God should punish the sinners only in Bihar. What about the whole of the world? Do you consider that only Bihar consists only of sinners, and the whole world consists of saints?”
And he had neither guts nor a gentleman’s attitude: he never sent back any answer. I wrote a letter to Ramdas, his son – because he was my friend – I wrote to Ramdas, asking him whether his father had received my letter or not. He said he had received it, “But he has no answer to give so he is keeping quiet.”
These people are diverting things: now bringing God into it, that God has punished homosexuals. Ask that fellow: “Then why has God not punished lesbians?” – because no lesbian creates AIDS. In fact, if women are intelligent they should all become lesbians. That is the greatest safety for women, and then they will leave men to suffer from AIDS or whatsoever they want to do. And then we will see how God punishes them. This is strange, that homosexuals should suffer and lesbians be protected.
If I could just summarize your response: you're saying that Mr. Falwell is coming from a fear perspective. Using fear, emotionally.
He is.
You're making, from your transparent ego, simply a comment – with no emotion behind it?
What I am saying exactly, is that AIDS is the ultimate outcome of a perversion. God has nothing to do with it. Religion has no ground to exploit on this. It is a simple fact that has tremendous implications. One, if men and women are not allowed freedom from marriage, then there is going to be perversion of many kinds, because monogamy is unnatural.
It is unnatural for men?
It is unnatural. There is no man who would not like to love many women. In fact, Soren Kierkegaard has a statement, “I would like to make love to all the women of the earth. Still I don’t think that I will be satisfied.” And he is stating a very significant point. Religions have managed a certain kind of bondage between men and women, and they have created the idea of sin and guilt so that people cannot easily move from one relationship to another.
In countries in the Middle East, for example, it is very difficult to make contact with a woman – even to see the face of a woman. And in the Middle East homosexuality is very ancient, for the simple reason that whenever a man wanted just to change his taste, women were not available. He had to look toward men or even toward animals. This is ugly.
If we make marriage dissolve – for example, in my commune marriage is just a game, like any other game. And every game has its rules, so marriage has its rules. But no rules of any game are ultimate. We make them, we can change them. In this commune, it is very easy to move from one woman to another, from one man to another, without creating any kind of scandal, without feeling any guilt, without creating any jealousy.
In the traditional marriage, monogamous marriage, if lust is within the individual for different partners, different experiences, then what you're saying is that the individual is trying to control these desires so much that they must be dissipating a lot of energy.
It is, it is. The more monogamous a country, the more people will be repressed. And their repressiveness will become violence, war, homosexuality, prostitution, sodomy. It will take all kinds of forms, which will be difficult because they have already moved away from nature. If we want that the world should not end in such an ugly disease, marriage has to be dissolved. Every religion has to drop the idea of celibacy – because all those celibates are bound to become homosexuals.
All your popes, all your bishops, all your cardinals, all your priests of any religion, all your monks – Buddhist, Christian or Hindu does not matter, because you have all put men and women separately. There are monasteries where no woman has entered in one thousand years. Then those monks… Man is intelligent: he will try to find some way out for his repressed energy. Now what can you do? Your biology does not change just by the idea of celibacy. Neither does your blood change its ways, nor your food, nor your hormones. Nothing changes by your idea of celibacy. Your idea of celibacy is simply an idea. Your body knows nothing about it.
The body goes on creating semen. What are you going to do with it? How long are you going to repress it? And repressing it is a double wastage, because in repression you need much energy to repress your own energy. So you become a vicious circle, you cannot create anything; so none of the monks of any religion have been creative. They have not contributed anything to human civilization. They have been parasites, and they have created masturbation, homosexuality, lesbianism, sodomy.
This is all through the repression?
It is all because of repression. Man’s sexual energy should be allowed absolute freedom. It should be man’s birthright.
Are you saying “man” including both men and women?
Yes.
Osho,
You predicted that two-thirds of the world's population would die of AIDS. Do you still stand by that?
Perhaps more, because there is nobody bothering to do anything about it.
It's taking a while.
Not a single step in any country is being taken to prevent it. On the contrary, every government is trying to repress the information about AIDS. Every individual who suffers from AIDS is trying to repress the information about it leaking to the public, because he will be condemned. If you find that people in a monastery are suffering from AIDS, that whole monastery and the whole religion will be condemned. So every vested interest is trying to repress information.
The disease has already spread widely, and the problem is that it is not only by sexual intercourse that you can get it. You can get it by kissing somebody because saliva is a carrier. Now, kissing should be prohibited completely, absolutely, with no exception. Tears carry it: if you kiss a woman and a tear comes into your mouth you can get it. And my understanding is if tears and saliva can carry it, then perhaps soon they will discover that perspiration also carries it – any liquid coming out of the body.
This is the first time that there is such a dangerous disease, so contagious, which has no cure – because basically, it is not an ordinary disease, it is more an existential disease. A man loses interest in women – for any reason: religious, physical, medical, legal, or any reason – a man loses interest in women, becomes interested in men. Soon he gets fed up with that, because in man and woman there is a contrast, a polarity, an attraction. Between man and man there is no polarity. It is just like trying to create electricity with only positive poles, without the negative pole.
Two men making love simply means similar energy, which will not be creative of life. Lovemaking with a woman is healthy. In places where older people are not condemned for lovemaking, people live longer. In countries like India, where even a person at the age of fifty starts feeling, “Now it is ugly, guilty, a sin, when your sons are married, to make love to your wife – it is not right,” people die sooner.
In the Caucasus there are people who are 170 years old still making love, 180 year-old people. But you cannot call them old, because they are still working in the fields, just like any young man. And my explanation is that, in the Caucasus sex has never been repressed, but has been appreciated, enjoyed, loved. In the Caucasus it is just like with the Eskimos: if you are a guest, the wife will be offered to you. Just as we offer food and a good room to the guest, the wife is also offered to you. It is not thought in any way to be immoral. People in the Caucasus live longer than any other people in the world. And they are the poorest people, with no medical facilities, with not enough food.
My feeling is that man can live at least three hundred years, if his energy is not disturbed and perverted so that he starts fighting with himself. That is very destructive. AIDS is just your own energy fighting with itself. Your energy has to come to a balanced state, like in those parts of Russia. The balance is such that except death, nothing can disturb it.
Osho,
I'd like to get to another quote. You say: “That's how we are going to take over the whole of America.” Are you saying that you are going to be taking over America in the sense of controlling it – for example, in government, philosophy? Or just through your happiness?
Just through our rejoicing, singing, dancing. We are gypsies, and gypsies have their way of conquering the world.
Are you sending out a warning you might be moving somewhere else?
Certainly, with my whole circus.
That's interesting.
And tell Canada – it is not far away!
You just told them!
Are you the ringmaster of this circus?
Certainly.
Osho,
I'd like to get back to when you say: “I have the only religion.” Are you saying: “I, Osho, have the only religion”?
No.
Or are we our own masters – each of us individually?
Each individual here. When I say “I,” that is not my ego. It represents all my people around the world. I am just their spokesman.
What I am trying to get at is, are you saying that “I, Peter, have the only religion”; “I, Tom, have the only religion”; “I, Mary…”? That it's within each individual?
No, when I say that this is the first and the last religion, the meaning is that all the religions up to now have not been scientific. They were all superstitious, they were based on a certain belief system. Belief was basic. Now, nobody can believe without repressing doubt. Belief is only repressing doubt. If there is no doubt, there is no need for belief. You don’t believe in the sun, you don’t believe in science, you don’t believe in light. You know they are, there so no belief is needed. All religions up to now have remained beliefs. That’s why they are called “faiths.”
Three hundred years ago, for the first time, science started a new movement which was based on doubt: just absolutely against belief. Go on doubting till you find something which is un-doubtable. That’s my approach too. I am trying for religion to have a scientific base.
Science inquires into objects, religion inquires into your own subjectivity. But the method need not be different: the same scientific observation, I call witnessing. Very alert, just go on inquiring within yourself, without any belief, without any prejudice. If you have courage enough to go without any prejudice, if you have courage enough to go without any belief system, soon you will stumble upon truth. It is there within you.
I say this is the first religion because it is the first scientific approach toward man’s interiority. And I say that this is the last also, because there is no other possibility. There are only two possibilities, either belief or doubt. Hence, I say it is the last, because you cannot do anything else: either you believe or you doubt. If you believe, you will never know the truth. If you doubt persistently, and go on doubting, you are bound to find it. And when doubt finds something, it is no longer belief, it is no longer faith. It is your experience. You can stand by it. You need not go to Jesus or Buddha, you need not take support from the Bible or the Koran. You are your own authority.
So when I say this is the first and the last religion, I am not talking about Tom, Dick and Harry. I am simply stating a fact: that no religion up to now has tried doubt as its basic method. This is the first religion. And I am also calling it the last, for the simple reason that there is nothing else that can be done. Only two things are possible and I have done the second thing. The first, all the other religion have done, and failed.
Osho,
Let's touch on some other things. Clairvoyance – is that a reality?
No.
What are your comments about people that channel what they claim to be spirit entities?
They are just crazy, surrounded by idiots.
So somebody like Edgar Cayce – you've heard of Edgar Cayce? – The Sleeping Prophet.
Just rubbish.
Where does it come from? It would appear to be legitimate – something happens. Is it all from the mind?
It is all psychic – just mind.
Osho,
Can you give me some comments on some people here: Ronald Reagan, the president of the United States.
Just a third-rate cowboy-film actor.
Are you aware of the prime minister of Canada, Brian Mulroney?
No, I have never heard about that fellow.
You haven't?
He’s fortunate.
Osho,
What's a typical day like for you?
My daily life is just a constant bliss. Everything is blissful: eating, sleeping, talking, just sitting silently doing nothing. Everything to me is meditation. Sitting under my shower is meditation, eating my food is meditation, because I am always the witness. Even in sleep I am a witness: I know that I am sleeping.
So it is, in a way, the same witness, but enjoying different things, different scenes. And, because I never think of the past or of the future, nothing bores me. You can go on giving me the same food every day and I will enjoy it the same way every day. My sannyasins who work in my kitchen, they get bored!
Are you vegetarian?
Yes, I am vegetarian.
Is diet important to awaken?
No, it is not important, but once you are awakened it is difficult to destroy life for your food. So, before enlightenment it is not important, but after enlightenment it is immensely important.
Osho,
What are your thoughts on the drug problem in the North American society – cocaine usage, marijuana?
In fact, all the governments should help the scientists to find better drugs with fewer side effects, rather than repressing drugs. It is stupid. Whenever you stop something you give great importance to it, and particularly for the youth – it becomes a provocation. The government is responsible for all the young people who are being destroyed by drugs. There is no need.

In my birthplace, just in front of my house, there was a beautiful temple. I persuaded the priest of the temple that because of the big wall around the campus, people used that wall as urination place. It was in such a place where you could sit down and nobody would see you.
“So write on the wall in big letters that pissing here is absolutely prohibited.”
He, of course, was convinced. Before that, nobody had pissed there; after that you could count lines of people!
The priest was very angry. He came to my father and said, “Your boy is dangerous. I have never seen people queuing, and when I ask them they say, ‘Just because you have written it, immediately the idea arises.’”

Any prohibition is dangerous. But the Christian God started the whole stupid thing, by prohibiting Adam and Eve from eating from the tree of knowledge, and the tree of life. Now, in the Garden of Eden there must have been millions of trees. If God had not prohibited those two trees, I don’t think even now we would have found them. It was impossible. But prohibiting it – and then dumping the whole thing on the poor snake, the serpent – God had done it already. He provoked it.
All these governments should make an effort that better drugs are available – which give you more euphoria, more joy, and no side effects. Science is now capable of doing it.
But you don't allow drugs here in Rajneeshpuram.
No.
But you are saying outside of Rajneeshpuram it's okay?
No, I am saying these drugs are not okay. And the reason is, because the governments are prohibiting them, otherwise, science could have figured out very easily… LSD can be purified, and it should be made available without prescription, through medical stores, through hospitals. In fact, every hospital should have a room where anybody who wants a drug experience should be given it under medical care, because it is worth having. And I think that is the only way to take away the whole charm from drugs.
In India they have tried many times to prohibit alcohol. And each time they prohibit it, many more people start drinking. And they drink the wrong kind of alcohol, because it is made by the people themselves. All kinds of poisoning accidents happen. Thousands of people die because they have drunk something they knew nothing about. Again, and again, the same stupidity. Then they withdraw the prohibition and the percentage of people drinking alcohol falls immediately.
In fact, the way you have made society, people are so miserable that they need something to forget what is happening in their life: what their wife is doing to them, what their boss is doing to them, what their husband is doing to them, what their children are doing to them. Those poor people need something to have at least a few hours of relaxation.
My people do not need it; that’s why I don’t allow it here. We have better methods. Our meditations are nothing but drugs – perfect drugs, without any chemicals in them. A man who can meditate will not be able to enjoy drugs, any drug, because his meditation gives him so much peace, and the drug will disturb it.
Drugs never give you anything. If you are too disturbed, then a drug relaxes you. But if you are at the peak of your bliss, the drug will bring you down. So people who live in the valleys need drugs; people who live on the peaks don’t need them. Our people don’t need them. It is not because of any government law that we are prohibiting people from bringing drugs in – it is because of our own people, they don’t need it. In fact, it is destructive of their meditation, their love, their joy. The drug makes them dull, stupid, takes away the sharpness of their intelligence.
But, what I am saying about the outside world is that governments should emphasize the fact, that it is a tremendous problem. Sending young people to prison does not help; you simply destroy those young people, you destroy their education. And I have not seen that a single person who has been imprisoned has been changed. He comes out and again goes back to the drugs. Now he comes out more professional than he had gone in, because there are experts already inside the prison who know more about drugs. He was just an amateur. From all those people he gets ideas of other drugs that you will get in Kabul, Manali, in Kathmandu, in Goa – where you will get the real thing.
There is no need for all this nonsense. Courts are involved, jails are involved, young people are destroyed. It is the duty of every government to provide people with some kind of relaxation, some kind of peace, some kind of silence. If you cannot provide meditation, at least you can provide medicine. To me, drugs should be medicine. And if we want, we can change all the bad effects; it can become a healthy thing. Each Sunday morning, rather than go to the church just go on a trip!
Osho,
On that note I'd like to thank you very much for spending this time with me.
I enjoyed it.
The listeners, I know, will very much appreciate it.
Come again.

============================================================

Ted Viramont,
Madras Pioneer, Madras, Oregon, United States

Glad to meet you.
Osho,
How's your day gone?
Just…
What's an average day consist of for Osho?
Only of blissfulness – the same.
Do you have leisurely pursuits at all?
Nothing.
Osho,
Do you believe in fighting injustice?
I don’t believe in anything.
You don't believe in anything? Do you think that one should fight injustice?
One should not have “shoulds” and “should nots.” One should simply exist spontaneously. If the moment brings fight, fight – and fight totally, intensely. But don’t fight for a belief, don’t fight for a prejudice. Live in the moment. Be alert, and out of that alertness whatsoever happens, enjoy it.
So let me explain it exactly because that may help you to understand other questions and answers.
Thank you.
I don’t have any belief system. I don’t have any creed, dogma. My whole approach is existential.
Right now, you are there, I am here – and this is enough. You may have prepared your questions, I have not prepared my answers.
Yes, I can see that.
So you can ask your questions. And I am a crazy man, I may say anything that comes in the moment. I don’t care for any consistency, and I don’t care for any respectability. My whole responsibility is to this moment. Beyond that, there is nothing.
How's this moment going for you?
Beautifully.
Great.
Your mustache is giving me great joy!
Thank you.
You are only missing a beard. It is half-hearted – just go the whole way!
Well, one is coming up. I've been thinking about growing one, you know.
Do it! A man without a beard and mustache is just like a woman with a mustache and beard.
Osho,
I have to thank you. About a year and a half ago, I had a really dark time in my life, and somebody suggested to get into meditation. I bought your Orange Book on meditation. Some of them I couldn't use, some of them I could, and the one that changed what was happening for me was the laughter meditation. I would get up everyday and I'd say, “Do I have to get up again?” And with the laughter meditation, as soon as I knew I was awake and I started laughing, the whole day went completely differently. So I need to thank you for showing me this meditation.
Just one meditation has done that much for you. If you try a few others, you will not find words to thank me.
I have 112 methods of meditation. If a person can manage even 10 out of those, his life will be a sheer joy with no dark moments, with no frustration, with no tension, no anxiety. Whatsoever happens, he will be able to accept it without any grudge, without any complaint. His gratitude toward existence will be infinite.
We are very ungrateful to existence. It has given so much to us, and without our asking. And we are such ungrateful creatures that we don’t even bother to look around at what existence is continuously doing for us – the sun, the moon, the stars, the trees, the birds, the animals, the people. You are living in a tremendously beautiful dream. But you have to be awake about it. Only then a gratefulness arises. I call that gratefulness true religion.
A man need not be a Christian to be religious; need not be a Hindu to be religious. All that he needs is a deep gratitude toward existence. He need not believe in God, he need not believe in heaven and hell – just a simple phenomenon: a deep-felt gratitude that this existence would have been missing something without you, that this vast existence needed you, no one else. Your place was empty before you, will be empty after you – you are irreplaceable. That gives a great contentment.
Man’s greatest need is to be needed. And when you feel that the whole existence needs you – otherwise you would not have been here.
Osho,
Somebody told me, that the only devils running around are the ones that are in our own hearts. Do you think that that's true?
There are no devils. With God, all devils disappeared; they were shadows of your God. Without God, the devil cannot exist.
You will be surprised to know that the word devil and the word divine have the same root; it is a Sanskrit root. In Sanskrit, divine is deva. From deva comes the English words divine and the devil. In fact, the devil and God are two sides of the same coin. There is neither God nor devil. You are there – either asleep or awake. If you are asleep, then life is misery, suffering, anguish, meaninglessness. If you are awake, all dis-ease disappears. For the first time, you find yourself surrounded by tremendous beauty, bliss, silence, serenity.
And to experience this, all that is needed is very simple: one should put his prejudices aside. One should not be a Christian, otherwise he cannot come to this moment of luminosity. One should put one’s communism aside, just for the moment. I am not saying put it aside forever. I am saying just put it aside for the moment, because I know that once you have put it aside for a single moment you have put it aside forever.
Why do you think that is?
Because the experience will transform you so totally that you need not go to the church; the whole existence becomes your church. You need not read the Bible; the songs of the birds, the fragrance of the flowers, the sound of the running water will give you all the gospels that you need. And they will be living. They will not be dead words printed in a book. They will be alive – as alive as you are.
And, if your heart starts dancing with the living that surrounds you, what is the need to be a Christian, what is the need to be a Mohammedan? These are for people who are asleep, and have never tasted anything of life. These are toys given to children to play with, to remain engaged, to remain busy. Your religions are not for mature people; they are childish.
Osho,
To change the subject here, does society have a responsibility to its disadvantaged people?
No.
None?
None. Society has destroyed people in the first place, and then starts talking about responsibility. Each child is being destroyed by the society, distracted from his nature, distracted from what he was going to be, what existence has meant him to be.
First the society distracts him, disturbs him – and then when he is disturbed, these great public servants start coming and saying that the society has some responsibility. This is a very cunning game. First make a man sick, and then run to fulfill your responsibility, service, duty, humanity, compassion, and bring medicine. But why hurt the person in the first place?
All children are born so innocent that if you can just leave them alone to be themselves, if you love them – and love is not a responsibility.
I am reminded of a small anecdote:

A Hindu monk was traveling toward the highest Hindu sacred places, Badrinath, Kedarnath, in the Himalayas. It is a long journey, tedious. Just in front of him a small girl, not more than twelve or thirteen years old, was carrying a boy, fat and heavy.
The sannyasin was very tired, and just as he was passing he said to the girl, “My daughter, you must be tired. You are carrying so much weight.”
The girl was very angry. She said, “Weight? You are carrying weight. This is my brother.”

Love is not a responsibility, love is not a duty. Love is your joy. So, out of your love do whatever you can do. But not out of your Christianity, not out of your ideology, not out of a sense of responsibility. Otherwise you will never be able to forgive your son, and neither will your son ever be able to forgive you. Duty is a dirty, four-letter word. Never do anything for the sake of duty because you are doing it reluctantly. And whomsoever you are doing it for, you are humiliating.
Children are there, just like flowers. What responsibility do you have toward the roses? Yes, to give water, some manure, but that is not responsibility, that is your joy – because your roses will be bigger and more fragrant. What you are doing is nothing in comparison to what you are going to get. You are not doing anything compassionate to the rosebush. In fact, the rosebush is being compassionate toward you. What have you done? Just put a little water, manure, taken care. And the rosebush comes with all its thankfulness, with all its flowers, and your whole house becomes fragrant. Suddenly you are no longer in an ordinary house: you are in a palace, you are in paradise.
And the same happens with children. They are also flowers: nourish them. But that is not your responsibility, it is your love. If there is no love, please don’t do anything, otherwise you are going to destroy the child. Love is the only safety. The child is too fragile, handle it with care. Responsibility is too big a word, and too heavy. Duty is just ugly. Why not rejoice in nourishing the child? Why not enjoy making him an individual?
But you are trying to make him a Christian; you are dragging him to the church, you are forcing him to believe in a God. You are creating fear in him: “If you don’t believe you will go to hell.” You are creating greed in him: “If you follow the church line, you will be rewarded a thousand fold in heaven after death.” You will destroy his whole life. And you will feel great that you have done your responsibility.
This is not responsibility, this is simply irresponsibility. A response should come only out of your loving heart. If you love the child, then you would like the child to find his own truth. You would not like him to live on a borrowed truth. Your child, and living on a borrowed truth? What are you doing? – making him a beggar? You would not like your child to be obedient against his reason, against his will. You will teach the child that obedience is not a virtue, neither is disobedience a virtue: “You have to choose. We can offer you whatever our understanding is – which is not perfect, which is not infallible. We can place everything that we have experienced in life, and it is up to you to choose or not to choose. You have to be yourself, not just my son.”
He has come through you but he does not belong to you. You have been a passage. But if roads start claiming people who walk on the roads, just think how much more difficult life will become. Once you travel on a road, the road says, “Stop! Now where are you going?” And what are parents except roads?
Osho,
Last year's program for the homeless, was that your idea?
I don’t have any ideas.
Were you happy with the results?
I am perfectly happy with any kind of result, so it does not matter.
Osho,
I lived for a time in a tropical environment, and I really liked the frangipani, the plumeria, the large ferns. When I came here to Madras it was quite an adjustment for me, environmentally. What were your first impressions when you arrived here at Rajneeshpuram?
I love every challenge, and that was my first response. Seeing this desert – I had not come to stay here, but this desert won’t let me go.
Why?
I have to make it into an oasis. And in four years we have done much. For fifty years, the land was lying here for sale. And it is not a small piece of land – 126 square miles. The Oregonians had not done anything for this poor land.
My first reaction was that I have to be here now.
You have to be here now?
I have to be here now. I had not come with the intention to stay either in America or in Oregon, but seeing the desert I decided that this desert has to be changed into a lush, green garden.
Are we talking figuratively or…?
No, I am talking literally. I never talk figuratively. We are going to change it – we have changed it. Now there are houses for five thousand sannyasins, all centrally air-conditioned. We have our own crops; we are self-sufficient, we have our own vegetables. These grapes are ours – you should taste them. And soon we will be making wine and everything – so go on coming.
Great grapes.
What are your impressions of the city now?
I enjoyed it; I am enjoying it. I always enjoy anything which is creative. To paint on a canvas is a small thing, but to change the desert into an oasis is real creativity. And our people are enjoying. They are working twelve hours, fourteen hours every day. Even God tired in six days, and on the seventh day he had to rest – and since then nothing has been heard about the fellow.
Osho,
Excuse me!
[for laughing.]

That’s great.
Our people don’t have any holiday because our work is our pleasure, our work is our worship. And even working twelve, fourteen hours a day, they have enough energy to laugh, to dance, to sing, to love. We are enjoying it immensely. It is really groovy.
Osho,
I saw on television that you told some reporter to tell the Australians you were coming down there. So do you have any plans in the immediate future to go?
No, not at all.
You're enjoying this desert too much, I take it.
Just I go on creating gossips.
Shame on you! You're going to get all those people out there really amped up, and – yeah!
How's your health?
Health? Very good.
Very good?
Mmm, because my sickness is such that it just needs to be taken care of. It is not a sickness. For example, I have allergies. In four years here, I have not suffered a single attack of asthma, breathing trouble, because the climate is dry. Humidity is difficult for me.
My people love me so much that they will not wear any perfume, they will not come close to me when they have been working for twelve hours and perspiring, because any smell can disturb me. So this small oasis is taking every care. My sickness is not something which needs any medicine. I was born with my problem, nothing can be done about it. You can only take precautions.
It was difficult to take precautions in the ordinary world. Now, how can I prevent a neighbor from using perfume, burning incense? And particularly in India, every house has a god, every house burns incense. And they were giving me asthma attacks. I had to find a place where, for at least twenty miles, there is no neighbor. Jesus said, “Love your enemies,” and later on he adds, “Love your neighbors too” – which is more difficult.
I don’t have any neighbors; this is almost an island. And my people are aware of my difficulties, so they take care. That’s why I am perfectly healthy. Otherwise I can immediately be sick. It is not a question of time. Just open a bottle of French perfume here and I will be sick. I will not be able to sleep the whole night, my breathing gets so disturbed.
So that was one of the reasons I had told Sheela to look for some place big enough that we are far away from neighbors. I don’t want to interfere in their life, and if they enjoy perfume then who am I to prevent them from enjoying it? And she has found the perfect place for me.
Osho,
What happens to Rajneeshpuram when you die? It continues on as it is?
I cannot say anything, simply because I hate to dominate people. Even now, what is happening is none of my concern. I am just a guest. It is their place. I am not even a sannyasin – you can see. You are a little sannyasin – almost half. I am not a sannyasin at all. They love me, so they tolerate me.
You must admit that you have something to do with the religion of Rajneeshism?
Nothing.
Nothing?
Nothing. I enjoy talking, and out of those talks if somebody creates any ism, that is their business.
Osho,
It's written that Christ advocated nonviolence. According to the scriptures in the Bible, early Christians were fed to the lions when Rome ruled the world. And later Christians went on crusades, where they killed a lot of people. It is now hundreds of years later. Do you advocate nonviolence?
No.
You don't advocate nonviolence? You don't advocate violence?
No, I don’t advocate. I simply share my experiences of life. And it is up to my people to decide for themselves. I am not going to decide for anybody. They cannot dump any responsibility on me.
Sly of you.
Yes.
So there's really…
And this thing that Christians used violence, they killed people, they burnt people, they did everything – it seems to be going against Jesus Christ, it is not so.
Oh?
Because Jesus himself is very violent in his behavior. He talks about love; he talks, but he behaved just the opposite. He threw the money changers out of the temple with a whip in his hand. Is that nonviolence?
No.
He cursed a fig tree, because he and his followers were hungry and the tree did not welcome them with fruits. And it was not the season for figs to appear on the tree. Now, he is not only violent, he is idiotically violent. Cursing a poor tree which has nothing to do – when the season comes, the figs come. Do you think this man is nonviolent?
I'd been led to believe that for a while.
Yes, every Christian has been led to believe that. It is not…
I'm not a Christian.
You may not be. Christ himself was not a Christian, he was a Jew. He never heard the words christ or christian, because in Hebrew these words are not there. He was known as the messiah, which is equivalent to the Greek christ. His whole life – and it was not a long life, only thirty-three years – is full of incidents in which he proves himself arrogant, aggressive, violent, egoistic. And if his followers turn out to be the same on a larger scale, he is responsible for all that.
No sane person can say, “I am the only begotten son of God.” Just think, somebody in Madras declaring, “I am the only begotten son of God.” What will you think? That this man should be handed over to the police, should be sent to a mental institute: he is a crackpot. And that’s what the Jews thought of Jesus. In fact, they never crucified a messiah, they only crucified a crackpot.
Christians have proved perfectly well that the Jews were right to crucify this man. Retroactively, two thousand years of Christianity give evidence that that man was worthy of crucifixion. Jews were right, that man was dangerous. He himself was insane, and he was creating insanity in other people.
In fact, they delayed – he should have been crucified three years before. He started teaching only when he was thirty. If I had been there, I would have suggested crucifying him right away. “Don’t wait. In three years he will be able to collect a few fools, a few idiots – which are everywhere – and then it will become difficult. Then crucifying him will be wrong, because crucifixion will become the beginning of a new religion.”
So, whatever Christians have done, they have followed Jesus Christ, step by step. And until Christianity disappears from the world, it will be very difficult to live peacefully. It is Christianity which has been making every effort to prevent science from progressing.
Science would have developed immensely in these three hundred years, but the Christians on every step, from Copernicus to Galileo to Columbus – America was discovered against the Christians, against the pope, and I am amazed that when the pope comes, still you welcome him!
Osho,
You were in India at the time India gained her independence from Britain. What kind of an effect did that have on you – living under the British rule, and then not to have them anymore? It must have been rather traumatic for most Indians?
I am a little eccentric. I was more pro-British than pro-Indian.
Why was that?
Because everything that has happened in India – technology, science, education, colleges, universities, railway lines, roads, cars, airplanes – everything has happened because of the British rule. If there had been no British rule, India would have been the same as Ethiopia.
Before the British rule, for thousands of years they were burning women alive if their husbands died. Husbands were never burned when their wives died. I don’t see… It is a simple arithmetic, that this is a male chauvinist society. The husband is trying to control even after his death. The wife was forced in such an ugly way, that if you visualize the whole scene you would not believe it. And these are the Hindus who talk about great spirituality.
It is obvious that if you push a living person into a funeral pyre, the person is bound to try to escape. So what they used to do is first they would make the funeral pyre, and put the dead body of the husband. Then they would put the living body of the wife on and tie her to the wood, put many more logs on top of her, and then pour as much purified butter as possible. So that when the fire comes up there is great smoke, and you cannot see what is happening.
One hundred priests would be surrounding it, chanting mantras. A second circle will be of musicians playing drums, and making all kinds of noise, so nobody hears the screams of a living woman, burning and dying there. And this was all religious ritual. They have been doing it for thousands of years. The whole credit goes to the British Empire, that they prevented it, they made it criminal. It was criminal.
India has been poor for thousands of years. It is said in Hindu scriptures that people never used locks on their houses. Even if they were going for a few months’ pilgrimage they would not use locks, because there was no fear of anybody stealing. This is absolutely wrong. My understanding is that first, they had nothing to be stolen. Second, locks were not yet invented.
Indians are so lousy – they will not try to do anything. They would rather starve, but they will not make any effort to become rich. The country is tremendously capable of becoming rich, but the people’s minds are not able to use the opportunity.
Before Britain came into India’s history, these poor people were giving birth to ten children – only one would survive and nine would die. There was no medicine, no medical care. Now it is just the opposite, because of Britain. Out of ten children, only one dies, nine live. And that one dies also because of Indian stupidity – because Mahatma Gandhi was against vaccination, he was against allopathy. He was against everything that has been invented after the spinning wheel – and nobody knows when the spinning wheel was invented, perhaps ten thousand years before – after that, everything is evil.
It seems God made the spinning wheel on the sixth day and after that… Anything – railway trains, telegraph, post offices, telephones, radios, televisions – Gandhi was against all these things, he would not agree to them.

You will be surprised. I was a guest in the house of his son, who was my friend. There were so many mosquitoes in his ashram. And there were bound to be, because he was keeping many cows there, which are worshipped like mothers, and there was so much cow dung everywhere. I have never seen a dirtier place in my life. But it was all in the name of spirituality.
In the day somehow I managed, but at night I told my friend, “I will have to go to a nearby place” – which was nine miles from there – “and I will sleep there. How you can sleep with so many mosquitoes?”
He said, “No, we sleep.”
I said, “I don’t see any mosquito nets.”
He said, “My father would never allow the luxury of sleeping in a mosquito net.”
So I asked, “What substitute has he given?”
And he had given a substitute – kerosene oil. You paint your face, your hands, your legs, anything that is open, with kerosene oil. And go to sleep. Now, even the mosquitoes are intelligent enough not to come near you. But how you can sleep with kerosene oil?
And I said, “I suffer from allergies. I cannot even try it. This is my first and last visit to you. Any time you want to come, you can come to me. I’m not going to come here. This is sheer stupidity.”

Britain introduced much sanity. I am against slavery, I am against Britain dominating India, but I am not a fanatic in any way. I condemn Britain for whatsoever wrong they have done. But they have done so many beautiful things, I have to appreciate them.
So when India became independent in 1947, my whole family was involved in the freedom movement. Almost every member of the family had gone to jail, had suffered. But I was absolutely against – against my family, my father, my uncles. And I told them, “You don’t know what you are doing. Britain has maintained peace for the first time in the whole history of India.” Before Britain there was continuous civil war. In Gautam Buddha’s time, India was divided into two thousand independent kingdoms. India had never been one country before the British; it was Britain’s contribution that India became one.
And as Britain was leaving, India started falling apart. Pakistan became separate, Bangladesh became separate. Now the Sikhs want their own separate country. Soon the Bengalis, the Assamese – they have always been separate, it was under the British force that they remained one.
I used to tell my father, “You don’t understand the enormity of what can happen if Britain simply leaves the country. There will be violence, and millions of people will be killed.” And that’s what happened.
My father wept before me, and he said, “You were right. We were thinking that you always argue against anything – any unpopular thing and you are for it. And you were protecting and arguing for the British government so much.”
I said, “Now look. Britain has left, the country is divided. Trains are burning, houses are burning, children are being mutilated, women are being raped. This is your independence. This is what you had gone to jail for, and suffered.”
And in these forty years after Britain has left, India’s situation has become worse and worse. The population goes on growing. Birth control, the pill, abortion, are all against the religions, against spirituality.
When Britain left India the whole of India – including Pakistan, Bangladesh – was only four hundred million people. Now, India – without Pakistan, without Bangladesh – is eight hundred million. It has doubled in forty years. Its soil is completely prostituted.
Is there anything that can be done to save India, do you think?
I don’t think that anything can be done. Perhaps it is time for India to die. There is a time to be born, there is a time to live, and there is a time to die. It is impossible – because for thirty years I have been trying just that hopeless job in India. Touring all around the country continuously, telling people, “What you are doing is going to destroy you.” And my reward? They would throw shoes at me; they would throw stones at me; they poisoned my food twice; and before I left they made their last attempt on my life by throwing a knife.
Ten thousand sannyasins were present when they threw a knife at me. And the police somehow got the information from their agents, so twenty police officers were present there, before the knife was thrown at me. It seems almost impossible that with ten thousand witnesses – perhaps you can say that “They are sannyasins, they may be lying.” But your twenty high-ranking police officers, they were also witnesses. Still the man was released from the court, with respect. He has not done anything, the knife has never been thrown – and the knife itself was presented there by the police, it was lying on the table of the magistrate.
The magistrate informed me via a friend, “Forgive me. I know, but I am a man with a family, so many children. My promotion is due. I am being pressurized by the politicians and by the religious leaders, ‘If that man is not freed completely, then you will be in trouble.’ And I don’t want to be in trouble.”
The man belonged to a fanatic Hindu organization. That organization is going to rule India sooner or later, because Hindus are in the majority. And every stupidity that was there three hundred years ago will be brought back, because that is the Hindu tradition, the Hindu religion. The tradition of suttee – burning the widow – will be back.
Britain introduced divorce, its days are finished. The moment India is controlled by Hindus – and it is not far away – divorce cannot remain legal. In the Hindu religion there is no place for divorce. Marriage is forever.
They are interested in strange things – for example, that cow slaughter should be stopped. Not that abortion should be legalized, no, that is not the problem at all; that birth control should be promulgated, helped in every possible way, no, that is not the problem. The problem is that cows should not be killed.
Such a country, which cannot even see the priorities – I am not saying to kill the cows, but I am saying to first save humanity. Otherwise, who is going to save the cows? They will be killed by themselves.
My feeling is that Britain has done two wrong things. In the first place it imposed slavery on the country; in the second place like a coward it escaped from its responsibility. Britain should have remained there till they had educated people not to be violent, not to be superstitious, not to be against each other – Hindus against Mohammedans, Mohammedans against Buddhists, Buddhists against Jainas. There are so many sects and sub sects, and everybody is against everybody else. And the country is spiritual, and nonviolence is its ideology! This is all nonsense. It is just hypocrisy.
Britain has done a very lousy job. I was certainly angry with Lord Mountbatten. He was the wrong person to send to India, to make India free. He had no experience of politics; in fact, his whole life he was just a playboy. Just to keep him away from England – because he belonged to the royalty, and if a person belonging to the royalty is a playboy, then everybody’s wife is in danger, everybody is in danger so they kept continuously sending him out of England. But you cannot send him out just like that – he was royalty, he could have been the king. It was just by chance that he was not the eldest son.
First they sent him to Burma. When he came back from Burma, he was immediately told, “Pack your luggage and go to India. You have a great job to do: make India independent.”
Just think – the sheer immensity of the work. When you make a country a slave, for hundreds of years you have to fight for it. And within a day, you can make it independent. I don’t see the logic. Even when I was only seventeen I could not see the logic of it. I wrote a letter to Lord Mountbatten, “This is not the right time for this country to be independent. If everything is peaceful, it is simply cold war. Once the pressure of British control is gone, then…”
Did the independence of India have any bearing on your outlook on life?
No, because I am not interested in nations, I am interested in one world because my understanding is that, unless the world is one, we cannot stop wars; we cannot stop politicians cheating people, there is no way out for humanity except to commit suicide in a Third World War.
It's a big job, don't you think, to try to bring the world together in one.
It is a big job, but nuclear weapons have made it easy. On both sides – in America and the Soviet Union – now they have piled up so many nuclear weapons that they can destroy the earth seven hundred times. Now, neither America wants to get into a nuclear war, nor does Soviet Russia. But nobody can say it. Both will go on saying that they are ready, and both are continuing to pile up weapons. Now it is absolutely absurd. For what are you piling up weapons? You have seven hundred times more than is needed to destroy this poor humanity, and life on this small planet.
Because of nuclear weapons, the Third World War has become almost an impossibility. They will go on talking about it because that keeps them in power. People are afraid; people don’t know the whole information, what is going on. The Americans are afraid of the Russians; the Russians are absolutely in darkness, and they think the Americans are monsters or something. The Soviet clique that rules can rule only if it can maintain the idea that the Third World War is just on the horizon.
I have a certain respect for Richard Nixon, for one thing: that if the man wanted not to be thrown out of the White House, he could have simply started the Third World War. That was the simple way out of Watergate. Any cunning politician like Joseph Stalin or Mao Zedong or Mussolini or Adolf Hitler would have done that. In that way, Nixon is not a student of Machiavelli. He should read The Prince – but it is too late.
The only way politicians know to dominate people is either to keep the threat of war continuously alive through newspapers, television, radio, speeches – keep people frightened so they need your direction, your leadership. Adolf Hitler writes in his autobiography that a nation can become strong, great, only under two conditions. Either you go on creating a threatening atmosphere: “You are going to be destroyed,” or you start a war.
Do you think that governments will keep escalating and escalating until they forget what war is like, and then blow ‘em all up?
They cannot forget, and particularly at this time when they have accumulated so many weapons. It is dangerous to forget, they can backfire. They can destroy you, if you don’t destroy them beforehand. Either you have to use them in war, or you have to throw them in the Pacific. You have to get rid of them. It is not a time to forget, and who can forget?
Just the other day I saw a petition of the fifty scientists who are responsible for creating the nuclear weapons in America, urging the president and the Supreme Court: “We were not aware what we were doing. And now it is beyond our capacity, to conceive what is going to happen if war happens. Nothing like it has ever happened before. So it is time to stop.”
Those fifty – the most important American physicists, nuclear experts – are urging: “It is time. Not much time is left; stop creating more, and somehow destroy these weapons or use this energy in some creative way. Find a way that the energy can be used to produce electricity, to run factories; it can be done.” But the politicians want to be on top. And both America and Russia go on threatening each other.
Smaller countries like India are trying to create nuclear plants. Fifty percent of India’s population is on the verge of starvation, and India is exporting its wheat to outside countries.
Rajiv Gandhi is my friend, but I would like him to be assassinated, just like his mother. What he is doing to the country is simply inconceivable. And what are you going to do by creating a nuclear plant? You can never become a great nuclear power. It will take three hundred years for India to become a power like America or Russia. And in three hundred years, if you are going to create nuclear weapons, not a single Indian will be alive. This is simply a madhouse.
So I say that this is the time. We can make people aware to drop all boundaries, if you want to drop wars. And I am not appealing to the politicians. My appeal is to the intelligent people of the world, to the young people of the world.
These fifty scientists should join hands with the Russian scientists, and should declare that they are not going to produce any more nuclear weapons.
I want that there should be a world academy of scientists. I can give them a place in my commune; we have enough space.
Have you let them know?
Yes, and that’s what you have to do.
Okay.
Make them aware that I am inviting them.
If all the scientists of the world refuse to cooperate with the politicians – and this is the time to refuse – and if all the scientists of the world can refuse, and all the poets and all the painters, and all the people who are not political, but creative, the masses can be convinced. Then Ronald Reagan cannot deceive anyone.
If the whole intelligentsia of America appeals to the masses, “We should withdraw our boundaries. Now there will be no visa for entry, and now there will be no passport. Burn all the passports, burn all the green cards. We are one world, and there is no need for any of that. Movement from one country to another should be the birthright of every human being.”
This is the time that, under pressure – humanity is under two pressures: one is nuclear war, the other is the disease AIDS, which is spreading like wildfire and which has no cure. Not a single medical person in the whole world expects that there will be a cure sometime in the future – no possibility. The disease is a category in itself. It is not to be put in the same category as other diseases – cancer, tuberculosis and all that. They are now nothing, you should not call them diseases.
AIDS has no cure – and it is so contagious that you need not be sexually involved with somebody, even kissing you can get it.
I heard last week they found the AIDS viruses in tears also.
Tears also, soon they will find it in perspiration. Any infected liquid coming out of your body will carry the virus. This is going to be an even bigger danger than nuclear weapons. And anybody who has AIDS would not like anybody else to know about it, because he will be condemned. Governments are repressing the information on how many people have AIDS.
The government is repressing that?
All over the world – because if any government accepts that there are so many people suffering from AIDS, then two things are clear: that that government is declaring that its people are sexually perverted, homosexuals; and secondly, accepting that AIDS is there, then it is the responsibility of the government – what are you doing about it?
And there seems to be nothing that can be done. So the only way is to suppress the information; don’t let it surface. But this is more dangerous. Every AIDS person should be stamped, the way you stamp your cattle, just on the forehead. He is a walking nuclear weapon, and he can infect anybody. Kissing should be prohibited, not drugs. Drugs will do, but kissing won’t.
People should be made aware of what precautions should be taken. No government is trying to do that. In fact, if you declare of somebody that it seems he has symptoms, no hospital accepts him.
We have two sannyasins here who have AIDS. We have made a special place for them – the most scenic place. We are giving them every facility that is possible, because those people are going to live only a few months – at the most two years, that is the maximum. Most probably within six months they will be gone. We are trying to make their six months as comfortable, and as beautiful, and as relaxed, as we can. But in the outside world, people who have confirmed AIDS are freely moving around. But they can bribe the physicians to keep it secret. And that is part of the physician’s oath, that he will not make the disease of the person known. This is very dangerous.
They are not allowed in the hospitals because they may spread it in the hospitals. Soon their families – the moment they come to know, then all love and all sacrifice and all responsibility will disappear. Then your own wife will not be ready to live with you. Your own father will suggest, “Get lost.” Your friends will turn their backs on you, nobody would like even to look at you. This was the situation of lepers in the Middle Ages. But lepers are not dangerous, in fact there are many kinds of leprosy which are not infectious.
This disease AIDS is the ultimate outcome of homosexuality. It has to be dissected, analyzed, and given the whole perspective. I call AIDS a religious disease because homosexuality was born in monasteries. Keeping men together, not allowing any women to enter the monastery, not allowing the monks to go outside and mix with people, keeping nuns in their nunneries, not allowing any men to enter – what do you expect?
All the religions have been preaching celibacy. Now, celibacy should be made illegal. Anybody saying that he is celibate should be imprisoned immediately. All the monasteries should be closed, because those monks are dangerous: they have all been homosexuals. It is not their fault. When you take the vow of celibacy, your body, your chemistry, your physiology, your biology has no idea what celibacy is. And there is no way to communicate the idea to your body and biology. It remains just hung up in your head, and your body goes on functioning in the same way. It goes on creating semen, it goes on creating sexuality. Now what do you have to do with it?
In lonely places, people have been known to make love to animals, because even a man was not available. If you make the woman unavailable, he becomes a homosexual; if you make even man unavailable, he becomes a victim of sodomy, he starts making love to animals.
Love is such a natural phenomenon that preventing it has caused the whole problem. Politics has brought you to the nuclear Third World War. And your religions have brought you to an even better chance of committing suicide, AIDS.
This is a time of such pressure that if we bring all the pressure to the public’s eye, there is a possibility to change the whole situation. It is always in danger that people take drastic steps. Otherwise, who risks? And when everybody’s life is at risk, who bothers whether you are American or Indian or Russian or Chinese? This is the time when we should stop calling ourselves Christians, Hindus, Mohammedans, Indians, Germans. And the people who have some kind of world fame should appeal to the whole world: “Destroy your identity cards, destroy your visas, destroy your maps, and remember that the whole earth is ours.”
War will disappear. There will be no need for war. In fact, just as monasteries are responsible for homosexuality, wars are also responsible for it, because you don’t allow soldiers to take their girlfriends with them. So what are the soldiers going to do?
They're not going to make love to their guns. They're going to make love to something else.
They can make love even to guns. If you are left only with a gun and nothing else, you are intelligent enough to make an effort.
My right hand's better than a gun.
A gun is perfectly good. To me, this pressure of AIDS and nuclear weapons is a great opportunity and challenge. And I hope that something good is going to happen soon, that we will not be so idiotic as to die and destroy this beautiful planet. We are going to do something.
Do you have any idea what that is?
I have. And soon you will know.
Okay.
Just a few more days.
A few more days?
Yes, my people are preparing.
Okay, thank you.
We obviously have a lot of work to do on our planet here.
Right.
Osho,
Do you think that we should, in the meantime, continue to explore off our planet?
No.
No?
Right now there is no time. It is sheer stupidity to waste money and time going to the moon and to Mars, because the nearest planets don’t have life. There is a possibility of life, but those planets will take a lifelong journey, they are millions of light-years away. As far as we know, we are the only living people in our solar system. In other solar systems, scientists guess there may be at least fifty thousand planets that have some kind of life. But this is not the time to discover their life. This is the time to save our life.
And if the world becomes one, which I don’t see is such an impossible thing – if Oregon and California can be one nation, I don’t see why Canada cannot also be part of it. Why can other nations not also be part of it?
Doesn't that start with ourselves though?
I have started. In my people you will find people from all religions, people from all nations, even Russians. You will find people of all races – white, black, yellow.
If it's possible for Oregon and California to be side by side, and be part of one nation, is it not possible for sannyasins and the rest of Oregon to live side by side, and be part of one nation?
We are absolutely ready. For us there is no problem. Even if somebody descends here in Rajneeshpuram from some other planet, he will be received with celebration. We have no problem. All the problems are on their side, we have no hostility.
Are you putting the responsibility on them, then?
No, I’m not putting responsibility, just stating a fact. We are a minority, such a small minority that it is simply idiotic for Oregonians to be afraid of us. We should be afraid of them; we are not afraid. It is really a hilarious situation.
Oh, I've been out there. You should be afraid of some of those people out there!
No, we are not. We are not afraid of anybody. And that is making them more afraid, more hostile. We went on inviting them – we invited the governor, we invited the attorney general: “Before you start saying anything about us, please come and see. And then say whatsoever you want to say.” But they don’t even have the guts to come here.
You have such impotent people in your governor, in your attorney general that I am simply surprised that their wives don’t divorce them. We are not going to kill them: we have not killed anybody. We are asking them to come, but they won’t come. On the contrary they have put their army on alert – that within three hours’ notice they have to be ready to reach Rajneeshpuram, any day. Strange. We invite the governor, he is inviting the army. He should have told us. We could have invited the army ourselves! Why go such roundabout ways? We are straightforward people. We can invite the army, just the way we invited the street people. We can have a project: three months Share-a-Home with the army!
There are no immediate plans for that right now, is there?
That's great! Are there any plans in the future that you can see that would be similar to the street people's invitation?
No, I never repeat anything.
Uh?
No, always something bigger.
Well, I understand there would be something bigger.
Something bigger is going to come next month.
Next month?
Next month.
I would be happy to hold it until next month if you want to tell me now.
You will be there. You will be an eyewitness to it.
I'd be delighted. What's the date?
Just wait.
Okay, I shall pull out my patience and…
Yes.
…and put it on.
Good.
Any hints?
Do you think it's true that the more light you have, the better you can see what is trivial and outmoded in your conditioning?
Right – the more comfortable you are, the more luxuriously you live, the more richness in all the dimensions of life, the more is the possibility for you to become aware of one thing: that you have everything, but you don’t have yourself. You are surrounded by all the luxuries – there is nothing more to be added to it – but who are you? Living in a palace, but what the hell are you doing there? The question is bound to happen.
The poor man cannot ask it. He is looking for bread, he is looking for his children’s medicine, he has no house. Do you think he will start inquiring about his interiority, about truth, about the meaning of life?
It is impossible for a poor man to be religious. That’s why I say I am the rich man’s guru. It has nothing to do with me. Only the rich man has the opportunity to inquire beyond mundane things. The poor man – I feel sorry for him, but I cannot think that I should go to Ethiopia and teach meditation there. They will kill me, and I am not suicidal.
The world has enough technology now. If its old prejudices and stupidities can be dropped, we can make the whole world a paradise. Nothing is lacking. If we can reach the moon, if we can create so much destructive power, why can’t we create creative power? The same power can be transferred into creativity, because power is always neutral. You can burn your cigar with a lighter; you can burn your house too. Your lighter does not give you any instructions what to do.
Science has made all the energies available. You are using them in the service of death. Use them in the service of life. It seems all the politicians of the world are followers of Reverend Jim Jones, because they are trying to turn the world into a Jonestown. Except Rajneeshpuram. And sooner they realize it, the better.
You said you felt sorry for the poor man because he…
I feel sorry. Not for his hunger. I feel sorry that he cannot move into higher realms of experience. I don’t feel sorry for his hunger; I don’t feel sorry for his death. I feel sorry that he could not afford the greatest experience of life: of the eternal flame in himself.
The pope may be sorry also, but he is sorry because these people don’t have food, don’t have clothes, don’t have hospitals. I know those who have clothes and have hospitals and have schools, they are also in tremendous misery, suffering. They may not be starving but they are not rejoicing either.
I would like the whole world to live so luxuriously that people start becoming bored with luxury. You should ask me how I am bored with Rolls Royces.
How are you bored with Rolls Royces?
90 Rolls Royces – anybody would be bored. And my people are going to try to have 365. They are bent upon boring me. What can you do?
And the whole earth is capable, for the first time, of such luxury that you don’t feel any material need. If all material needs are fulfilled, then what are you going to do?
There is nothing other than meditation. That is the only door that is still left open. You have knocked at all other doors and seen there is nothing. Only one door is still open, inviting. And whoever has entered that door has never come back frustrated, disappointed. There is not a single case in the whole history of humanity that anybody who has reached the center of his being was disappointed, felt meaningless, was miserable, committed suicide. Not a single exception.
That’s why I say meditation is a scientific thing. That’s how science works. If you can find something without any exception, it becomes a rule. Meditation is a scientific method, because in the whole of history nobody has denied that it leads you to the ultimate blissfulness. But what can I do? It is just a simple question.
I feel sorry for the poor man because he cannot understand Mozart. I feel sorry for him because he cannot understand the dance of a Nijinsky; he cannot understand the flute of Pannalal Ghosh or the sitar of Ravi Shankar. My being sorry and sad is for totally different reasons. I would like him to enjoy the best music in the world, the best poetry, the best painting, the best dance. I would like him to reach the highest peak of his intelligence, but his poverty is preventing him. And the politicians and the religious leaders are responsible for his poverty.
It is such a strange phenomenon that these politicians go on sympathizing with the poor people, with the starving people, with the dying people; and the same politicians go on throwing food into the sea. Ethiopia is dying, and Europe has thrown thousands of tons of fresh oranges into the ocean.
And the political leaders go on talking about sympathy, compassion. The religious leaders go on talking about sympathy, and they are against birth control. They are against abortion: “It should not be legalized.” Strange. They are responsible for creating more population, and that means more poverty. The politicians are putting seventy-five percent of their nation’s income into war, army, nuclear weapons, and people are dying – even their own people.
Thirty million people in America itself are on the streets. And you are creating nuclear weapons, and you are making efforts to reach Mars or the moon. You must have gone nuts!
And because I simply say the facts, they are angry at me. They don’t have any answer. I am ready for an open discussion with Ronald Reagan, or Governor Atiyeh, or anybody. And I would like them to face me, and say why what they are doing, and what they are saying, are totally contradictory things. On the one hand you are responsible for poverty; on the other hand you are showing so much great sympathy because these poor people are going to vote for you. You are against birth control methods because if birth control is applied, where is Mother Teresa going to find orphans? It is such a complicated vested interest. Mother Teresa will die if there are no orphans. What will she do? And who is going to give her a Nobel Prize? Orphans are needed, urgently needed – the more the better.
It is a very simple thing. Just the people of the world have to be made aware of it. And that is your work.
That's what I will try and do.
Good. So come back again. Or do you have some more questions?
No, nothing.
Come back – and next time with a little beard!

============================================================

Yoga Pratima,
Rajneeshpuram, Oregon, United States
Osho,
How are you helping to change the world?
The world does not exist; it is only a word. What exists is the individual. By changing the individual, the world is changed. What has been done in the past with humanity is that people have been deprived of their individuality. That’s how there are crowds, but no individuals; Mohammedans, Christians, Hindus, but no individuals.
It is the same process which has been applied down the ages in the armies. The whole training of an army is a basic effort to destroy the individual completely, and to make him just a number.
If a man dies in the fight, in war, his name does not appear on the notice board. What appears is that “number sixteen” died. Now, number sixteen has no wife, no children, no friends, no old father and mother. Number sixteen is simply a number, and number sixteen is replaceable. Some other person will soon fill the gap and will become number sixteen. And the man who was behind the number sixteen is reduced, by and by, with subtle processes.
The whole training of the army is that the person is made to do things which are irrational. In the beginning, his reason tries to assert. But his reason is punished, his disobedience is punished, his argumentativeness is punished. His obedience is rewarded. Soon, the person can see that he can only allow his reason to function, if he is to remain in continuous misery and punishment. Otherwise, he has just to follow whatever the order is. Even if the order is to drop the atom bomb on Hiroshima, the person does it just like a robot, without considering that he is destroying 160,000 people within seconds.
But he is not an individual, he no longer thinks. His thinking has been very scientifically destroyed. For hours in the morning, in the evening, for years he’s been parading: turn right, turn left. He cannot even ask, “What is the point?”

It happened in the Second World War – because soldiers were needed, everybody from every profession was asked to sacrifice himself for the country. A professor in Germany was asked to join the army. He had no more students anyway; for three years nobody had entered into his post-graduate research work. He was sitting unnecessarily; he should go into the army. He said, “There is no problem for me. I can go anywhere, but the army will find difficulties with me.”
But he was not listened to. And when he was standing in line the first day and they said, “Left turn,” everybody turned, except him. The commander asked him, “Have you heard me or not?”
He said, “I have heard, but I don’t see any reason why I should turn left. And these people will be ordered again and again, and they will finally come to the same position in which I am already standing.”
“March forward!” And he would not. He wanted some reason for every single act. Why should he march forward, why not backward? The commander got fed up. Such a person cannot be made into a soldier. He asked his chief what to do with this man: “He asks about everything. I don’t know myself, I had never asked myself. This is a simple training of learning obedience, but this man is impossible. Everything is confronted with ‘Why?’”
The commander-in-chief said, “You don’t know him, he is a very famous professor of philosophy. His whole life he has been arguing, doubting, and it is certainly difficult for the poor old man to drop all those habits. Give him some work which he can do, something very simple.”
So he was sent to the kitchen. And he was given a pile of peas, and told that he had to sort them, the smaller ones on one side, the bigger ones on the other side. After an hour, the chief commanding officer came in and the professor was sitting there with closed eyes – and the pile was exactly the same as when he had left, one hour before. Nothing had been done, not a single pea had been moved.
He asked the man, “What are you doing? You have not done anything!”
He said, “So many problems have to be solved before I start. You said to me, ‘The smaller ones on one side, the bigger ones on the other side.’ What about those that are in the middle? Where do they go? And it is not only a question of just three grades. In fact, there are many grades. Between the bigger and the medium, there is again the middle; between the medium and the small, there is again the middle.”
He said, “It is such a complicated mathematical thing, and I am absolutely ignorant about mathematics.”
Finally he had to be discharged because he was good for nothing.

What was the problem? The problem was they were trying to take away his individuality. They were trying to make him a robot: “Just follow, there is no question of ‘Why?’”
Years of turning left and right, and marching forward and backward. One slowly stops asking, “Why?” What is the point? One simply starts doing things mechanically. Only then can you make a human being drop the atom bomb on Hiroshima, Nagasaki, and he does not ask “Why?” Those people of Hiroshima had done nothing wrong, they had not harmed anybody. They were civilians, small children, women, pregnant women, old people – they had nothing to do with the war as such. Why destroy them?
No, such a question does not arise anymore. An order is an order, and to follow it is his duty. He dropped the bomb on both the cities, went back to his camp, had a good dinner, drank with his friends, laughed, joked – and Hiroshima and Nagasaki were burning. Never before in history had such destruction been seen. But this man seemed to be absolutely unaffected. In fact he seemed to be enjoying, celebrating, because he had done a great job. As the first man to drop the atom bomb, he had become a historical figure.
In the morning, he was asked by the journalists, “We certainly believe you could not have slept in the night. After killing 160,000 people, how could you sleep?”
He said, “You don’t understand the psychology of the soldier. I have done my duty, and I have done it perfectly. And I had a very good sleep. I had not had that good a sleep for months because this project was there, and I was so excited by the project of dropping the atom bomb.”
He was being prepared for it. And, naturally, when the work is finished – and finished with perfection – one has the right to relax and go to sleep. So he said, “I ate well, drank, danced with my friends and went to sleep.”
Now, something is missing in this man. His heart is no longer functioning. His reason is dead. He looks like a man, but he has become a robot.
What has happened in all the armies has happened on a subtler level in all the societies. The basic method is the same. Every child is brought up to follow, to be obedient, to respect the elders. Every child is conditioned that on his own he is always going to be wrong, that he is a worthless person. One is not born worthy; worth has to be deserved, it has to be earned, it is a goal. Very few people achieve it. As a human being, he is condemned. As he is, he is condemned. He is given all kinds of shoulds and should nots. The child is so helpless that sooner or later he is caught in the net.

It was a continuous problem for me, and for my family. In India it is an accepted fact that if any elderly person comes into a house, you have to touch his feet. Now, I was not willing to do that. The first time it happened a neighbor came in – he was the age of my father, or perhaps older than my father – and my father touched his feet, asked him to sit comfortably. And then my father told me, because I was still there, “Touch his feet. He is older than you, he is older than me.”
I said, “He may be older, that does not mean that I have to touch his feet. In fact, I know this man: he is a drunkard, he goes to the prostitutes, he has been imprisoned twice for stealing. Now the police are suspecting him of a murder, which has happened just two days ago in front of the house.”
In fact, my whole family had to force me not to say anything about it, because I had seen it happen. And I told my father, “I suspect this was the man, although he had a black cover over his face. But I know his feet, I know his hands, I know the way he walks – and you want me to touch his feet? I cannot do it.”
My father said to me, “Then it is better that whenever anybody comes into the house, you simply move from this place. Don’t remain there to confront the man, to confront us and to create an embarrassing situation. Now what will that man think?”
I had said everything in front of him. He became really nervous when I said, “I can recognize this man’s walk and how he killed the man. Just because you are insisting, I am not going to the police station. Otherwise, this man is a murderer.”
Hearing this he almost started trembling and perspiring. I said, “Look at him. He should touch my feet, otherwise I am going to the police.” And the man touched my feet because he knew that I had seen him. He had seen me seeing him – I was the only eyewitness.
It was not late, just nine o’clock in the evening, and in front of my house there was a small, dark street. He was hiding in that street as the man passed on the road; the man’s shop was nearby, and the time in India to close a shop is nine o’clock.
So everything was settled: nine o’clock he would close his shop, and he would walk in front of my house – because his house was there, four houses away, and that was the best place, because the murderer could hide in the darkness. There was not even a lamp post. Electricity had not come yet to that place. I saw him come out of the street.
It was a hot summer night, and I have never felt at ease with heat. Cold I love, heat I simply hate. So, I was just sitting on my bed waiting for the air to cool down a little, and then I would go to sleep. At that very moment the case happened. The man was not aware that I was sitting on my bed on the terrace, because all the lights of the house were off and everybody had gone to sleep. I was in darkness, and as he came out of the street I immediately recognized the man, although he had a black cover over his face.
I told my father, “Now look. You touched a murderer’s feet, just because he is a little older than you. But there are men, donkeys, many bulls and many dogs older than you, older than me. If this is the rule – that I have to touch the feet of anybody who is older than me – then perhaps I should commit suicide, because I cannot continue from morning to night touching everybody’s feet. Do you think I don’t have any other work?”

These are subtle strategies to distract the child from his innocence. If he follows the convention, the tradition, he is rewarded. I was always punished, never rewarded, but I accepted each punishment with great dignity because each punishment made me a more solid individual. They were not aware that they were unknowingly helping me; their rewards would have been bribes, their punishment gave me mettle.
Every day I was punished, at home, in school. And they were wrong and I was right. But my crime was that I would follow only what I felt to be right. It has been a great adventure to be right and to be punished. That gave me tremendous integrity, and everybody – my father, my teachers – later on recognized it. Almost all of them recognized that they were wrong. But they treated me just like any other child. They never thought that I would be able to stand all the punishments, and still insist on doing the things I wanted to do.

For years, I had been standing outside the class. The teachers would find it easier to teach – otherwise I was constantly asking questions. And I knew, and they knew, that they didn’t know the answers. The moment I would ask anything they would say, “Simply go out of the class.”
I would say, “But that is not the answer to my question.”
For example, I asked the man who started teaching me arithmetic, why in every language there are ten basic digits, one to ten. He said, “My God, I have been teaching mathematics for almost twenty years.” – and he was a first class MSc in mathematics – “Nobody has ever asked me, nor have I ever thought myself why there are ten digits.”
I said, “I know the answer. But first I want to know whether a gold medalist in mathematics from the university knows a basic thing which is fundamental to mathematics.”
He was angry and embarrassed. I said, “It is very simple. I have seen the villagers counting on their fingers, and there are ten fingers. Man must have started thousands of years ago counting on fingers. And, because all over the world man has ten fingers, hence every language, every country has those ten basic digits. Otherwise there is no reason.” And there have been mathematicians who have used fewer digits; Godel used only three. He said, “That’s enough: one, two, three. After three, comes ten, eleven, twelve, thirteen. After thirteen comes twenty.” And he managed to solve all kinds of mathematical problems with only three digits.
I was interested in mathematics, that’s why I had joined the class. But before joining the class, I had looked in all kinds of mathematical books in the library, and found this Godel, who managed to work only with three digits. That gave me the idea, that the ten digits has nothing to do with mathematics, it has something to do with the hands of man.
I said, “Rather than answering me, you are telling me to go out of the class and stand there at the window. There is no problem for me, because I enjoy the air outside better than this dark hole which you call your classroom. And this dirty furniture, ugly, hard. And you force small children to sit on this furniture, six, seven hours a day; that is enough to destroy their soul. I am perfectly happy outside. There are trees and birds and fresh air. And particularly you are not there, so I need not bother about any questions.”
One day, the principal was on his round, and I was standing outside the mathematics class. She said, “This is strange. Whenever I come on the round, you are always standing at this window looking at the sky. Sometimes, out of curiosity, I simply look out of my office to see whether you are there or not. Without exception you are always there.”
I said, “You have to ask my mathematics teacher, because he tells me to stand here. And I enjoy. He is boring, and whatever he teaches can be learned very easily from any book. Standing here, in front of lush green trees, and so many birds and such fresh air, who bothers about arithmetic? And anyway, I am not going to count money in my life. So please don’t disturb me, things are going perfectly well. He thinks this is punishment, I think this is reward – reward for asking a reasonable question.”

And I learned with these small things, by and by, that this society rewards lies, punishes truth. It teaches truth, but never rewards the truth. This whole society is against the individual, it wants everybody retarded. The retarded people are good: they never give anybody any problem, they cannot raise questions, they are easily enslaved. The individual is essentially rebellious. He will say yes only when he feels it, otherwise he is going to say no.
You ask me how I am preparing to change the world. I am doing just the opposite of what society has done to individuals. I have to undo it; there is no need to do anything else. My sannyas is simply a process of undoing what the society has done to you. I am simply provoking your intelligence again. It is dormant – it is there, nobody can kill it, it can only be repressed. Finding a suitable, comfortable situation, it can again start growing.
I want every one of my sannyasins to be utterly unique. This is one of the reasons I am against communism, because communism is the ultimate result of destroying individuals. Other societies have done it partially, communism does it totally – hence in these seventy years in Soviet Russia, not a single rebel. Strange. A country which brags about revolution, but does not produce revolutionaries.
It is something worth noting that before the revolution Russia was a poor country, but it had many geniuses. Perhaps no country could have competed in the early years of this century, or the last part of the preceding century. If you wanted to choose the ten best novels of the whole world, from all languages, you will be surprised that at least five will be Russian. And they will be the topmost. And after the revolution, not a single novel. What happened to the genius of the country?
There was Fyodor Dostoyevsky, who has written as nobody else has written in the world. His insight is so penetrating that if the Bible is lost, nothing is lost; but if his books are lost, humanity will be always poor, because Fyodor Dostoyevsky cannot be replaced by anyone. And there were all these men: Leo Tolstoy – a giant, each thing that he has written should be written in gold – Chekhov, Gorky, Turgenev. These five people you would have to put first. Only then, five from the rest of the world.
A country that produced people like Turgenev has not produced any poet of the same caliber, any novelist of the same caliber since. What happened? What went wrong? The individuality has been completely destroyed: people are just robots. A slight disobedience and you are finished, nobody will ever hear of you.
Just a few years ago, Andrei Sakharov was given the Nobel Prize because he was – and he is – the greatest nuclear physicist in the whole world. Any country could be proud of the man. He has gone deeper than Albert Einstein, farther than anybody else in the whole history of man. But because he signed a few petitions – not much, he has not created any revolutionary party or killed somebody or bombed a train, he just signed a few petitions.
Before him, three other scientists had received the Nobel Prize, and all three were immediately thrown into imprisonment, because the Soviet government does not want any Soviet citizen to receive the Nobel Prize. In their eyes, the moment a man receives the Nobel Prize he becomes world famous and starts having influence around the world, which he can use against the Soviet government.
The Soviet government does not want the world to know who the people are who create the nuclear weapons. The Soviet Union does not want these people to go out of the country even for a single day. They don’t want these people to know that their country is poor and starving, and that all this nonsense about communism is baseless. Outside, the world has everything of which Russians cannot even dream. And intelligent people like Sakharov will immediately be able to see how far the world has progressed.
In Russia all publications are from the government – no private publications, no private newspaper, no private magazines. The Soviet people know only what the government wants them to know. It goes on hiding many truths, it goes on spreading many lies, but the Soviet people have no way to find out what is true and what is not. If a man accepts the Nobel Prize, then he will be invited to receive it. He will have to go outside of the country.
So, three scientists who were members of Sakharov’s academy – he was the director – had received the Nobel Prize. The government told them to refuse and they did not; that was a crime. They asked the government, “Why? If our efforts and our researches are being rewarded by the world, you should be proud of us. Three Soviet scientists getting the Nobel Prize – you should be immensely happy, because in the same year not a single American is getting the Nobel Prize. But on the contrary, you want us to refuse it.”
And what they did with these three people is absolutely inhuman. They kept them awake for fifteen days – they went on giving them anti-sleeping doses – fifteen days continuously, not a single wink. First, after three or four days, they started losing interest in their families. Their wives would come, but they would not look at them; the children would come but they would not respond.
After the first week they were like zombies, they could not recognize their friends. After the second week they had forgotten their own names, and they had forgotten all about the subject for which they had received the Nobel Prize. After three weeks they were finished, their whole psychology was messed up. And then they were produced in the court: these people were insane and the court had to decide what to do with them.
They had been made insane. Of course, the court asked what their names were, and the scientists were standing there, looking with empty eyes as if they had not heard. One was shaken, forced to say his name. As if he had lost his voice, he looked all around – what is happening? And finally he managed to stutter, “I don’t know. Perhaps somebody here may remember my name. I am trying hard, but no name is coming.”
The court decided they were insane. Just three weeks before, these people were declared Nobel Prize winners. Within three weeks, all three persons went mad. And there is no account of where they had been for these three weeks. And why were they not produced immediately after they got the Nobel Prize? If they had refused and disobeyed the government, then they should have been produced immediately. What had been done in those three weeks? Sakharov knew everything that had happened because he was the director. His conscience started hurting, because everything was happening before his eyes. He was not doing it, but it was happening in the academy itself, and certainly he felt he was responsible.
The man somehow had saved a little bit of individuality. He signed a petition that this was absolutely inhuman – because he knew what had been done to these people, what kind of medicines and injections had been given to them, and he knew what would be the result. They had destroyed three Nobel Prize winning geniuses, and now the court was sending them to a mental asylum.
Sakharov simply signed a petition appealing to the president of the country that justice should be done. Even if they didn’t want the scientists to receive the Nobel Prize, this was not the punishment for it. And because he signed the petition, the same happened to him. He was immediately arrested in the middle of the night. He was removed from the directorship of the academy. But because he had already become a world-renowned physicist, they could not give the same treatment as had been given to the three others. His name was known all around the world. So they sent him to Siberia.
Siberia is hell for Soviet Russians. Sakharov is still alive there; his wife has followed him voluntarily. Doing nothing, such a genius is rotting. They hardly get food enough for survival, and the whole day they have to work like slaves. Now, Sakharov has never worked in this way. He is a man of intelligence, not a manual worker.
I am against communism because it totally destroys the personality. But this is simply the logical conclusion of all the societies in the world. They differ in degrees; communism has stretched the logic to its very end. In Russia they say the society is not for the individual, the individual is for the society. I would like to say to my people that the society is for you, you are not for the society.
Society is simply a word: there is no society. Civilization, ideology, all is jargon; the reality is the individual. So if we can undo, deprogram enough young people around the world, we are sowing the seeds of changing the world without talking about any change. We are changing it.
There is no direct way to change the world, because there is no world which you can change. Wherever you go, you will find individuals. So the individual has to be changed. And that is simple, not difficult at all. If the society had been able to make you something which is absolutely not your potential, it had succeeded in doing the impossible. What I am doing is simply the natural course. If you have to take water upward, you will have to pump it, make arrangements for it. But if you have to take water downward, no arrangement is needed. The water will flow downward itself: it is its natural law.
The societies around the world, religions, civilizations, cultures, have created very subtle mechanisms to destroy the individual. All that we have to do is to free the individual from those subtle mechanisms. That’s why I am continuously hitting on every device that society has created to destroy people. The moment you are no longer a Christian, something immensely beautiful will arise in you. The moment you are no longer American or Russian or Indian, you will feel wings growing in you.
The moment you are no longer addicted to any doctrine, you will be surprised what sharpness comes to your intelligence – how you start looking at the same world with a totally different meaning, different eyes. Everything is the same, but you are no longer the same. As if suddenly a blind man has found eyes, or a deaf person has suddenly started hearing.
Those examples don’t do justice, but just give an indication. The man who is completely deprogrammed is my revolution. And we need only a small minority in the whole world. There is no need for a big majority to change the world. The majority in the world has never done anything. It is always a small group of people who has run the world.
Now, Jesus is running millions of people. Karl Marx is running half the world. Mohammedans are second only to Christians in number. Buddhists are third, Hindus are fourth. A few people – not more than a dozen, you can count them on your fingers – have been running the whole world.
We can create thousands of deprogrammed people, and those deprogrammed people will be like a fire – a wildfire. Wherever they will move, with them will move a new perspective, a new way of life. And they will become magnetic forces, to which people will simply be pulled.
So, I have no plan to change the world directly. That has not happened. Many have tried it; basically they went wrong from the very beginning. Start with the individual and release his intelligence. Don’t give him any program, don’t give him any project. Just make him free, and tell him, “The whole sky belongs to you – now you can fly anywhere you like. And whatever you want to do, do because there is no God to punish you, or reward you. You are totally free for any act that gives you bliss, that gives you peace, that gives you serenity.” These people will become models and they will set the whole world afire.
So that is my idea of how we are going to change the world. By changing you.
Osho,
What is the responsibility of a doctor toward a patient who is dying and no longer wants to live? Should the doctor help him to die?
It is something very significant to be understood. In the past – in the beginning days of medicine and medical science – nine children would die out of ten, only one would survive. The population of the world was very scarce.
Hippocrates created an oath for doctors – he was the father of Western medicine, allopathy. Humanity is immensely grateful to that man, and his oath was perfectly right for those days. The function of the doctor was always to save life. Life was so difficult; to save people was certainly the need of that time. But times change, needs change. Books don’t change.
In medical colleges and universities, Hippocrates’ oath is still given to doctors before they can practice. Now, this is so stupid. The world population is four times what it should be. Scientists have been trying to find out how long people used to live five thousand years ago. They have not found any skeleton which is more than forty years old. Around the world, in every excavation, it is the same situation. People had died at thirty, thirty-five. At the most, the longest life was forty.
Now things are totally different. The population is four times more than the earth can afford. And the progress of medicine has helped people’s lives to be physically healthy, with less possibility of sickness. And it has lengthened life; in Russia there are thousands of people who are beyond one hundred and fifty. In every country of the world the average age has gone up, even in countries like India. Just forty years ago, under the British Raj, the Indian’s average age was twenty-three. Now it is forty-seven, more than double. The population has become four times bigger, the age has become double – more than double – and India does not have all the modern facilities. Its water is polluted, fortunately; food is scarce. Fifty percent of the population lives hungry, on one meal a day.
In spite of all this the population still goes on exploding. If Hippocrates was here he would change the oath, I am absolutely certain, because the man who cared for life would have cared for the whole living earth.
Now, in the oath these words should be added: that a doctor’s duty is to help the patient, if he wants to live or if he wants to die. It is his choice and the doctor has to be respectful to the choice of the person. It is his birthright. If he no longer wants to live, only he can decide. In certain cases – perhaps the person is in a coma – then his family, his wife, his children, his parents, can decide. Perhaps he has nobody, he is alone, then the medical board can decide – that if this person is going to live in a coma forever, then what is the point of keeping him alive? This is not life. And in keeping him alive we are keeping so many people unnecessarily engaged, so many mechanisms unnecessarily used, so much money unnecessarily wasted – and he will never open his eyes.
So these are the three things: if the person is still in his senses, aware, and makes a will that if he goes into a coma, then don’t go on keeping him alive. And if he wants to die, just today, it is his freedom. Up to now we have been victims of death. For the first time we can become masters of death. Up to now we have been just helpless: whenever death comes, it comes. Now it is possible for us to decide both when to die, and what kind of people will be born. Up to now it has been accidental.
You need carpenters and you go on producing doctors: strange. You need doctors and you produce plumbers. Everything is topsy-turvy. The plumber is doing the work of a doctor; the doctor is somewhere catching fish. We are in a position to decide what kinds of people are needed in the society, and it would be the sanest way.
You grow certain vegetables which you need; you grow certain foods which you need. You make houses comfortable, beautiful and so you can feel cozy, safe against the wind, against the sun, against the rain, against the snow. And you need a certain comfortable, relaxed place. You ask the architect: you can give him your needs and he knows how to manage those needs in as aesthetic a way as possible. About everything we have become scientific; only about man are we still unscientific. This is unbelievable.
We should decide what kinds of people are needed. How many engineers, how many doctors, how many dental surgeons, how many surgeons, how many nurses, how many teachers, professors, scientists; everything can be decided. And we can decide that these people should not suffer from the diseases that are known to us. We can create a protective wall. We can manage that these people will not be indoctrinated into some unnatural life pattern. We can create the first seed of being always a rebel.
So, on the one side we have to be scientific about birth, and on the other side we have to be again scientific, human, compassionate. Help the person if he wants to live, perhaps he has not had time enough to live. If he wants to live, give him health, give him life – not a life in a coma in a hospital bed, that is sheer nonsense. If Hippocrates was in such a state, going into a coma, coming out for a moment, going back again, he would have shouted, “Destroy that oath! I want to die, this is not life.”
For anybody who wants to die, it is the function of the medical profession, of the commune, of the people who love him to make his death as beautiful as possible. Why make it accidental? Why should he die of old age? Why can’t he die without becoming old, and suffering all kinds of things which come with old age? He has lived, he has loved, he has created, now there is no need for him just to go on and on. And he is not being forced, we are not telling him to die, but we are simply giving the right, the constitutional right that if he wishes to die…
Yes, there are problems. For example, this moment he may think he wants to die, and by the time you have arranged everything for his death he changes his mind, he says no. So precautions can be taken, he can be given time, so that if he wants to die, he thinks it over for three weeks. And if after three weeks he still finds that he wants to die, and he has not wavered – he can keep a diary for three weeks – it is enough. And we can give him a beautiful departure.
There should be beautiful places – death temples – in every hospital, in every nursing home, where everything is arranged for the best: the flowers, the garden, the people. And every person who wants to die must be given time so that he can learn something of meditation. So while he is going into a deeper and deeper sleep from which he will never return, he can go on doing his meditation.
Meditation and death happening together is the best that can happen to anybody – because he is dying, yet he is aware that he will be dead for you all, but not for himself. He will simply be freed from this body. And because he has died with awareness, he will not be born again. He will be free, a white cloud in the vast universe.
We have to make death beautiful: music, dance, silence, meditation. Up to now man has been born accidentally, dies accidentally. And between the two do you think you can live meaningfully? – between two accidents? Your beginning is an accident, your end is an accident. Do you think between these two you will be able to live meaningfully? Impossible.
The beginning should be considered by the most intelligent people. You are creating a body for a soul; create the best body, so only a better soul can enter into it. You cannot create the soul, but you can create a beautiful house. That’s what scientists are now capable of. And if you can get the best souls, you will have a totally different world – without wars, without poverty, without sickness, without old age.
And you will have transformed even death itself into a ceremony. It is a departure. All your friends can be invited, all those who have loved you can be present. The dying man can say good-bye, thank all those people, can have another look, because he will not be meeting them again. In an accidental death, this is not possible. Death has to be made according to the will of the man. And the medical profession is just to serve the freedom of the man, the freedom of the individual. It does not matter whether he wants life or death – whatsoever he wants, he should be provided for.
And there comes a moment in life when you would like to die. It is an immense relief. You have done everything that you wanted to do; you have lived every kind of experience that was valuable to you. Now, going on living would be simply repetition, as if you are seeing the same movie again and again and again – because the army is surrounding the movie house, you cannot be allowed to escape, you have to see the movie till you die. And even if you start dying they will immediately call the ambulance and take you to the hospital, because you have to live and see the movie. But you have seen the movie millions of times, and it is time – and you want to be allowed to get out of the movie house.
This is exactly the situation. When you have lived a hundred years, you have lived enough. Mostly people start feeling that now it is time to retire from life after eighty. Just as they start feeling to retire from work near about sixty, near about eighty they start feeling to retire from life. There is no point.
These people’s wishes should be respected. But provisions can be made, time can be given for them to consider. Time can be given for them to learn a certain simple meditation. They can be asked if there is anything they would like; it can be supplied. For a man who is going to die within three weeks, it is simply human that we should give him everything that he wants, and then let him go with celebration.
To me, death is not something bad. It is just a deep sleep. Those who fall asleep without meditation will wake up in some womb almost instantly. Here, you are preparing their funeral pyre, and they have entered into some womb already! You are unnecessarily wasting your time. The man has managed to enter another body.
But if a man can die with meditativeness, then he is going to become part of the whole. No longer will he be imprisoned in a small body; he will be as vast as the universe. And that is the goal of true religion, to help you to become part – an organic part – of the whole existence.
Osho,
What is it that happens within a twenty-four-mile radius of a living master that causes a person to become enlightened when he dies within that radius?
It is simply a law of existence, like other laws. The enlightened man has a certain energy aura around him. Everybody has, but different people have different colored auras; the color depends on their psychology. In fact, one can see the aura. There is a certain training how to see the aura that surrounds your body, and particularly your head. Looking at that aura, much can be said about your mind, your past, your actions, your desires, your imagination, your ambitions – almost your whole biography in the past. And, if you remain continuous with the past, the future can also be predicted.
As a person starts meditating, the colors of his aura start changing. When the meditation is complete – when you have come to your innermost point – you are surrounded by a twenty-five-mile-radius aura of immense whiteness. It is not like the sunrise, but like just before the sunrise, those few moments when there is light but the sun has not arisen. In the East we have called it brahmamuhurt, “the moment of the divine.”
And why have we called it “the moment of the divine”? The reason was because of that exact type of light: without any source because the sun has not yet risen; it is far below the horizon but the night is over, between the night and the day. In India, meditation has a very beautiful name, sandhya. Sandhya means the time just before the sun rises, and the time just after the sun sets – just a few seconds – because they are the same, a light without source.
The ordinary person’s aura is an average of two inches around him, but as he grows, becomes mature, the aura also becomes bigger. Finally, at the ultimate peak of your meditation, the length of the aura is twenty-five miles. Now, if somebody is dying in this area who is in love with the enlightened one, has trust in the master, whom do you think he will remember? The last thing is the whole of life condensed.
The man who was after money will remember his bank balance. Certainly he is going to remember his money: “Now what is going to happen to the money?” He is not concerned with his death, he is worried about the bank balance and the stupid sons and daughters who will destroy everything. That is going to be his thought.
A man whose sex has been repressed – a monk, Catholic, Jaina, Hindu – his last moment is going to be full of sexual dreams, because now there is no life energy to repress it. They have all uncoiled; the spring is no longer pressed by energy. Death is coming, energy is moving away. His past of repression will give him a sexual dream. He will die in that dream.
But if a man has loved a master, has been in tune with someone who is enlightened, he is not going to think of dollars, is not going to think about anything else, because that love with the master was the greatest thing in his life. In that moment he will open up toward the master, just like sunflowers open toward the sun. As the sun moves, the sunflower moves; in the morning it is facing east, in the evening it is facing west.
The dying sannyasin – the dying disciple – is just a sunflower. So when you do your gachchhamis, you should be sitting in a posture facing toward your master, because in those moments it can happen. If your gachchhamis are really authentic, if you are not doing them just as a formality, if you are really saying with your whole heart, “I go to the feet of the awakened one,” space disappears, time disappears. Suddenly you are available to the master.
The dying sannyasin will die with gachchhamis in his heart: utterly open, available, unconditionally available. Now, what is there to be afraid of? He is going to die. There is no risk. Living, there was trouble, there were problems. He could not commit totally, his commitment was divided, partial. He had a wife, he had children, he had a job, he could not say to the master, “I am absolutely, unconditionally surrendered to you, now you are my way. Lead me wherever you want.”
But now he can say it. Now there is no longer any wife, no children to go with him, no job, no money. Nothing that has been important up to this moment, and was preventing him from being totally connected with the master, is there any longer. Then why not take the chance? He could not do it in life, but he can do it in death. He can really feel – there is no need to say, “I go to the feet of the awakened one” – you need not utter the words. Your whole being feels it.
And in that is the whole secret. If you are within the twenty-five-mile radius, it is as if you are just sitting by the side of the master, because that energy field is your master’s energy body. And the moment you become open, suddenly there is just light, and eternal life opens its doors.
First try it in life, because if you can become enlightened in life, you will be able to enjoy this beautiful life which you were just passing by like a somnambulist. There are really a large number of somnambulists – ten percent. So if there are five thousand people here, ten percent of them will be somnambulists. They will not know it, but they will get up in the night and go to the fridge – the whole day they had been trying to diet – and they will come back and go to sleep, and in the morning they don’t remember anything. But they are puzzled: there has been nobody in the house and the ice cream has disappeared – and it is ice cream that the doctors are against – but they have no remembrance.
There have been very strange cases of somnambulists who will get up in the night and burn something in the house and go back to bed. And in the morning they will report to the police that somebody is doing mischief, their things are being burned every night.

It happened when I was visiting Hyderabad in south India. My friends there said it was not good that I accept the invitation of the family I was to stay with. “They are rich and have a very beautiful mansion with a big garden, swimming pool, everything. But perhaps you don’t know that house is haunted.”
I said, “If I had known it, then I would have certainly gone to their house. Then there was no other way. It was just accidental that their letter reached before yours. I am going to stay there and see what kinds of ghosts are haunting the house.”
There were not many people in the house: the husband, the wife and a daughter – only three persons. The daughter was not more than fourteen. What was happening in the house was that things were being moved in the night, from this room into another room, sometimes being thrown onto the roof, or onto the terrace, or in the garden. And naturally as neither the father was doing it, nor the mother was doing it, nor the daughter was doing it, the obvious conclusion was that it was haunted.
I told them, “I would like not to sleep away from you. I want to sleep in the same room with your family.”
The man said, “Why? We have made a beautiful place, the best room in the house with the best view.”
I said, “You can all come there if you want, but I am going to stay with you, because I am going to finish this haunting forever.”
They said, “But how will you stop the haunting? We are afraid of the ghosts. We lock every door, window, we all check.” First the husband checked, then the wife, then the girl, “To be absolutely certain. Whatsoever happens in other rooms let it happen, but the ghost should not enter into this room.”
And they said, “Strange, the locks remain locked, but things from our room are thrown out. Still, the ghosts seem to be very nice people: they are not destroying anything, not burning anything, not stealing anything. They simply change things around. But what is happening…the dining table we find in the sitting room, all the chairs have disappeared and they are on the roof of the house!”
I said, “Just leave it to me. Let me sleep with you.”
It was the daughter who was doing the whole thing. It happens mostly at the time when a girl or a boy becomes sexually mature, which is a very delicate period. But she was doing it in her sleep. I had to remain awake till the girl got up. I watched her. She was the last one to check, and she used to leave one window or one door available for herself. It was all unconscious; she was not doing it consciously. She would throw things out – I caught her red-handed, her eyes were open but she was asleep. I had to shake her. She suddenly woke up and she asked, “What is the matter? What is happening? Why am I standing here? Why is the door open?”
The father and mother came running. I said, “There is no problem. The first sexual desire is arising in this girl.” In India, particularly, you have to repress it continuously. And this was a rich family; the girl had to pass at least a post-graduate degree, then she would be married. So it was going to be at least ten more years. This repressed sexual energy was a kind of poison. Unconsciously she was taking revenge, she was angry. And all that together made her a somnambulist.
I asked the parents, they said she was a somnambulist from the very beginning. In her childhood she used to move from one bed to another, from the mother’s bed to the father’s bed, and in the morning she would be puzzled who had moved her from her mother’s side.
So I said, “Now the whole mystery is clear. She is a somnambulist, and now because she has to repress her sexuality, she is taking revenge on you. And she has done a really good job. But now it will not happen any more. Do one thing: make her free about her sexuality. If she goes with boys, let her go. Give her the pill, and the pill will destroy all the ghosts, don’t be worried.”
And that’s how it happened. The pill worked, and the house is no longer haunted.

People are living almost in sleep, but the knock of death wakes them up. Suddenly they see their life is finished, and they are drowning in darkness. In that moment they realize that they have missed life, they never lived it. They always postponed for tomorrow. They always thought to go to Kashmir, to go to the Himalayas; to see this, to see that, but they always postponed, “What is the hurry? There is so much work to be done. I cannot waste time. Three months in Kashmir?”
So you go on postponing living, and you go on preparing to live tomorrow. You sacrifice today for tomorrow, and tomorrow never comes. One day suddenly, instead of tomorrow, death comes. It is a shock. You were waiting for tomorrow, you were planning for tomorrow your whole life, and now there is no tomorrow. And you have never learned how to live today, you were always preparing.

There is a strange story in Tibet that a man wanted to be the wisest man in the world. He collected as many scriptures as were available in all Tibet. His library had thousands of ancient scriptures, and he was running from one place to another, because in those days books were not printed. He wasted fortunes on every book because it was the only copy. His whole life he was collecting, and waiting until the library was complete. Then he was going to study all these scriptures.
But life completes in death. He fell sick, and his physicians said that he could not survive more than twenty-four hours. He said, “My God, in twenty-four hours, how am I going to read all these scriptures that I have collected and wasted my whole life on?”
The physicians said that there was only one way: “You can ask the Dalai Lama for one thousand Buddhist monks to go through all the books and condense the essential points in those scriptures. So before you die at least you know the essentials.”
But those poor scholars also had to read, and there were thousands of books. They said even one thousand monks wouldn’t do, and time was passing and the monks were trying, and the man was getting more and more nervous – that soon the sun would set and he would be finished.
And he was inquiring again and again, what was happening, why the essential message was not being brought. First it was thought that everyone would bring the essential core of the scripture that he had looked in, but then there was no time to listen to one thousand monks and their summaries. So the monks were asked to please make one summary out of all the summaries, “And be quick! – because by the time the sun sets, the man will be finished.”
They rushed back into the library, and there were great quarrels, which is always certain where scholars are – arguments about what should be included and what should not be included. And by the time they decided, the man was gone.

This is not a story. This is actually an existential fact about almost everybody. I say almost, because I have to leave a few enlightened people out of it. Only in death is everyone surprised. But then it is too late, nothing can be done. Everybody dies in frustration, in despair, in anguish. But a man of meditation dies in joy, in peace, at ease with the whole universe. And it becomes very easy if he is connected in some way with someone who has already arrived.
The best is to do it in life, because then you can live life in an enlightened way. And life is tremendously beautiful: it is just a miracle all around. But if it cannot happen in life, because you have this and that and there are conditions, then at least let it happen in death. But it may not be possible for you alone – unless you have meditated so deeply that death will not create any disturbance in your silence. Then it can happen without the twenty-five-mile radius aura. It can happen anywhere.
But the chances of such a happening are rare because if it could happen anywhere, it would not wait for death. It would have happened long ago. So this device of a commune is simply to keep you engaged here. If you cannot become enlightened alive, I say, “Okay, at least don’t forget me when you are dying.” But you have to become enlightened – dead or alive!
The commune is an immense field of energy and experiment. And soon in other communes around the world, I will manage at least one person to be enlightened, so no commune misses this twenty-five-mile radius of energy.
Okay?

============================================================

Lars Mogansen,
Norres Kane, Hasselholm, Sweden

Glad to see you.
Osho,
It's nice to be here. I work for a newspaper in southern Sweden, a small newspaper, and I've got quite a lot of questions.
Good.
So if you would be as brief as possible in your answers…
Unfortunately I haven't read any of your books, so maybe some of my questions, or all of them, are unnecessary in a sense.
It is good that you have not read any. And you can ask the same question a thousand times, but my answer will again and again be different. So there is no problem.
I was reading on the back of a book called The Book and you're saying, “I teach a sensuous religion; beauty is far more valuable than truth. Beauty is God himself, truth is just an aspect of beauty.” And I'd like to ask you three questions about those quotes:
Are you actually teaching a religion?
Is there a God? Do you believe in God, or maybe you're even some kind of God to your disciples yourself?
And you're saying beauty is far more valuable than truth. Is that why – from what I see – most of the people here are young, good-looking people?
That is my way of disposing of God. When I say beauty is God, I’m saying there is no God, but only beauty. And I am making a distinction between truth and beauty because truth is more a question of the head. It is a more logical, philosophical inquiry. Beauty is of the heart. It is not logical, not philosophical; it is more poetic, more aesthetic. You can feel it, but you cannot prove it. You can experience it, but you cannot explain it.
Truth – the very word looks dead, a logical conclusion. Beauty is not a conclusion, it is a sudden revelation. When you see a rose it is not that you go through a logical solipsism, “This is a rose, and roses are beautiful, so this must be beautiful.” The moment you see it, the head stops spinning thoughts. On the contrary, your heart starts beating faster. It is something totally different from the idea of truth.
Truth is argumentative. Whenever somebody proves a truth, all that he proves is that he is more logically proficient than his opponent. So, in the whole history of philosophy, every philosopher has been contradicted: five thousand years of philosophy, and not a single truth on which all the philosophers agree.
Beauty is a totally different phenomenon. It is not a question of proving it. If you see a woman as beautiful, nobody is going to ask why. The question why is irrelevant about beauty. You need not prove it, nor can you. In fact, if the other person is idiotic enough and continues to say, “You have to prove why this woman is beautiful,” you will be at a loss. You cannot prove it, because it is something of the heart, and proofs are something of the head.
What I am saying in that statement is that the experience of religion is just like the experience of beauty, love. It is of the heart. It is not a theology, it is not a philosophy; it is more like a poetry, a painting, a sculpture.

It happened that Picasso was painting on a beach, and a man was watching him for almost two hours. He looked at the painting from every angle, and finally he could not contain his curiosity. He approached Picasso and said, “Forgive me. I don’t want to intrude into your work. For two hours I have been watching, but I cannot figure out the meaning of this painting.”
Picasso looked at the man and said, “Have you ever asked the meaning of all the stars in the sky? Have you stopped in a garden, and asked the meaning of all the flowers? What is the meaning of the songs of the birds? And if nobody is answerable for the beautiful sky, and the gardens, and the birds, why should you torture a poor painter? I don’t know the meaning. I know that what I am doing is tremendously satisfying to me.”
But you don't know the meaning, the goal, of what…
There is no meaning, and no goal. A life is in itself sufficient. A goal is needed only when something is not intrinsically valuable. The train has a goal, the machine has a goal; without the goal the machine is useless.
But love has no goal, it is enough unto itself. And if anybody’s love has a goal, remember, there is no love in it. Perhaps the man loves the woman because she is rich and old, and going to die soon. If there is a motive, any end, it destroys the very phenomenon of love. Love has to be unmotivated, without any goal and without any meaning. When you hug a friend, have you ever asked, “What is the meaning of hugging?” You will not find a meaning – and if you can find a meaning, then it is not hugging, it is just unnecessarily pressing each other’s bones!
There is something which is beyond meaning, which you cannot express through words. That’s why you are using a gesture. Your hug is a gesture of something which is inexpressible by words. Your hug is simply saying, “I would like you to be just part of me. I would like to be part of you. It hurts that there is a separation. It hurts that we are two.” Your hug is immensely expressive, but there is no motive in it, no end to it.
Everything that is valuable in life is always a goal unto itself. There is no outside goal. Anything that is valuable cannot be a means to some end. Just thinking of it as a means is reducing it, utterly destroying its qualities and values. Your interest is in the end. If you can get the end without this means, you will discard the means and you will get the end. You have to go through the means, because without the means the end is not available. But your eyes are focused on the end.
Love, beauty, poetry, painting, dance, music don’t have any goal. But they have immense blissfulness, a tremendous ecstasy. You can be drowned in it, you can forget the whole world. Time can stop. If time does not stop listening to Mozart, it means you are not listening. It simply means you are not capable of listening to Mozart. Looking at the paintings of van Gogh, if you are not forgetting the whole world then you are not looking at the paintings. Or you are only seeing the painting, but it has not been a heart-felt experience.
So the point is enjoying what you do at this moment?
Every moment, every single moment. Enjoy it so totally that you never have to look back, that you never have to repent that that moment was lost. Squeeze the whole juice of it, because the next moment is not certain. This may be the last moment. The past is gone, the future is uncertain: all that is certain is this moment. And millions of people are losing this moment for a certain goal in the future, a certain end to be achieved.
I wanted to say through that statement that religion has no goal, not even God.
Yes, but what you're working with is a…you could call it a religion.
I can. In fact, I call this the only religion. All other religions are in some way an exploitation of man’s weakness, helplessness, ignorance. They are not religions. This is the only religion, because there is no question of exploiting anybody’s fear and creating a hell, exploiting anybody’s greed and giving a promise of paradise, and eternal joys there.
I am not promising anything. There is no judgment, and there is no reward, and no punishment. If you live this moment totally, that is its reward. If you miss, you are already punished. There is no need for anything afterwards, there is no need for a judgment day in the end, when the universe will come to its ultimate death – there is no need. Each moment is giving you its reward, its punishment – and it is up to you. To me, not to live the moment is enough punishment: you missed a living reality. And to live it fully is paradise.
Paradise and hell are not somewhere else. Each moment both are available to you. It is your choice. People who are thinking of the past are missing. People who are thinking of the future are missing. People who are not thinking of past and future, and are simply living this moment intensely – burning their life torch from both ends simultaneously – they are the people who come to know what love is, what beauty is, what truth is.
Would that denounce people who are trying to make a better future for themselves, as well as for their children, and their children's children? I'm speaking of people that are active in trying to make a better environment, like Greenpeace, peace movements.
I understand. Just think, for five thousand years this is what every generation has been doing. The generation that has preceded us was thinking about us and making a better future: our present was their future. What have they done? For five thousand years continuously every generation, every father, every mother, every teacher, every priest, has been creating a better future. And the total result seems to be just the opposite.
Two things happened. They destroyed their present. They sacrificed, they thought they were martyrs, they thought they were doing great service to humanity. They were doing great disservice, because the time that was given to them – a gift of existence – they wasted. And they have not been able to create a better future. Those five thousand years should become a lesson.
My own understanding is, if you are living your present totally, out of this living, the next moment will be born. You have taken care of the next moment by living this moment totally. Just think how logic can lead to foolish attitudes. The father is told that he has to sacrifice his life for the children; his father sacrificed his life for him. Neither his father could live, nor he can live, nor are his children going to live, because they will be sacrificing their lives for their children. So everybody is sacrificing for somebody else. Strange. Then who is going to live?
So my insistence is: Live it. And out of your living experience the future will be born. If your living moment is of tremendous beauty and ecstasy, naturally you are creating the future – without any effort to create it. But if you are sacrificing to your children’s future, deep down you will be resentful – because your life is being destroyed by those children. And those children will be resentful toward you, because you were continuously bragging that you sacrificed your life, and you want your children to feel obliged to you. You would like your children to sacrifice their youth to your old age, because you sacrificed. This is so stupid.
I can agree on that. And what you're talking about, from what I understand, is the more traditional family relations both in Christianity and probably also…
Everywhere.
…all other religions.
But let me put it more specifically: more and more people are getting very worried about the situation – the political situation – with nuclear war threats, the environment and pollution, which is not the same sacrifice from father to son, father to son that we're talking about.
I understand. It is just superficially different, basically it is the same. The question of nuclear weapons should not be thought of as a future problem. It is in the present moment. So I’m not saying that you have to think about the future. It is a living reality. We are living surrounded by nuclear weapons. So do whatsoever you want to do right now.
But your pacifists are thinking about the future – that there should not be a Third World War, that nuclear weapons should not be created. Stupid. Again you are destroying the present moment. And the logic of people who are creating nuclear weapons is not different from yours – they are also preparing for the future, for the future of their people, for the future of their nation. They don’t want to be weak, they want to be strong. They want to remain in the position that nobody can invade them. The warmongers are thinking of the future, the pacifists are thinking of the future.
I’m neither a pacifist, nor a supporter of war. I’m saying let these idiots fight with each other, and humanity should live this moment as joyously as possible. If we can manage to live in this moment peacefully, joyously, the Third World War is not going to happen. We will have not done anything about the Third World War: if people are happy, if people are enjoying, nobody can drag them into a war. War is not a simple phenomenon, it is very complex. People have to be miserable, people have to be in suffering, people have to be sexually repressed. People have to be humiliated in every possible way by poverty, by hunger. Only then can you manage to convince them to destroy each other because they have nothing to live for.
Karl Marx has a beautiful statement in his Communist Manifesto. I don’t agree with his communism, but the sentence with which the Communist Manifesto ends is tremendously significant. He says, “Proletariat of the world, unite, because you have nothing to lose and everything to gain. Fight.” When you don’t have anything to lose, fighting becomes easier. In fact, there is a possibility you may win, you may have the whole world. But if people are living a beautiful life, a loving life, you cannot convince them that they have to destroy other countries, other people. You cannot do it, it is impossible.
Secondly, if people are not sexually repressed – which is the base of all wars, every soldier has to be sexually repressed. It is sexual repression that becomes violence. The soldiers and the monks in the monasteries are not in different boats. And both have been calamities to humanity. The monks have been going on crusades, killing in the name of religion – and the soldiers in the name of nation, in the name of culture.
But the basic thing is that if they are allowed to live their sex life in a relaxed way – the monk will forget all about the Catholic Church and the Polack pope, and he will say, “Let them go to hell – I am not going on a crusade!” He has a girlfriend, and every moment is so beautiful.
You cannot send my people to fight for anything. They will say no because they are enjoying every moment so much – why should they disturb their life and other people’s life?
It seems that they're ready to fight for your life, though.
No.
It seems like it.
They are just pretending. My people are not going to fight anybody. They are just enjoying toy guns, and…
Osho,
I don't think I can agree with you that it takes suffering, sexual repression, poverty and so forth, to make people go to war – because today it doesn't take many people to start a war, because there's so much technology involved.
I think – and a lot of people think – that there should be something done now. Are you suggesting that everybody just…
Do something…
enjoy…
…now! That’s what I am saying. Dance in the streets, rejoice in front of the White House, have parties before the Kremlin, make love before the White House. Thousands of people making love before the White House, that’s what is to be done.
Do you mean that?
My people are always ready. It is going to embarrass the politicians and bring them to some sense. And they will see that these are not people you can send to war. It just has to be proved that people are now fed up with politicians, and their continuous hunger for war.
Adolf Hitler has written something valuable in his autobiography. He says, “If you want to become a great hero in history, then war is absolutely necessary – because only in wartime heroes are born.” That is true. In peacetime there are no heroes.
If Ronald Reagan wants to become a world hero, then a war is necessary. Otherwise, he will be lost just the same way as Jimmy Carter is lost. Do you know where he is?
Not at the moment.
Nobody ever will – people will know only when he dies. Then there will be small piece in the newspapers, “Poor Jimmy has died.”
Osho,
So what do you think of your president Ronald Reagan personally?
Every politician is basically a criminal. The criminal and the politician have the same kind of mentality, and the same psychology. The criminal is one who could not succeed in being a politician. He’s a failure. That’s why he becomes revengeful, and goes in the direction of crime. The politician is the successful criminal. But nothing succeeds like success: once he’s successful, you forget everything about his criminal mind. Adolf Hitler, Joseph Stalin, Benito Mussolini…
Ronald Reagan.
They are all criminals, Alexander the Great, Napoleon Bonaparte. Your whole history is the history of criminals, big criminals. Small criminals die in prisons; big criminals become presidents, prime ministers, kings, queens. But sooner or later humanity is going to recognize that the history we have been writing is a history of the criminals, who have done everything.
When there was the Watergate case against Nixon, Mao Zedong made a statement. He was simply puzzled. He said, “Why is so much fuss being made about it? Every politician does it. That poor Nixon was simply caught red-handed, that’s all. It is not a question of doing.”
Mao Zedong’s statement is that every politician does it, has always been doing it – just Nixon got caught. He’s saying it about himself too, because he’s the president of a country and he has done every kind of crime that a man is capable of. But he was successful.
So my attitude toward politicians is that they should be treated as criminals, they should be watched as criminals. A climate should be created around the earth, that the moment somebody starts becoming political he should be hospitalized immediately.
That takes away the whole idea of democracy, doesn't it?
Democracy will be possible only when there are no politicians.
Anarchy?
No, I’m not an anarchist. This democracy is bogus, it is simply a rotary club of dictators – for four years, five years, one dictator; then for five years another dictator. This democracy depends on at least two political parties, and those two political parties are basically the same. The psychology is that one party rules – naturally it cannot fulfill the promises it has given to humanity, to its nation, to the people. Nobody can fulfill them, because to fulfill them will need such a radical change in everything, which the politicians cannot do.
But in those five years people become fed up with them, and the other party starts getting support. The other party says, “We are going to fulfill all these promises.” And the memory of people is not very long psychologically; it is not more than three years. That’s why every election in every country is after more than three years – four years, five years, but not before three years. It is a psychological standpoint. People forget about what the other party did five years before when it was in power.
People’s memories are just nothing. They see the party which is in power, and they want to drag it out of power – and the other party is ready. In five years’ time they will be disillusioned about the other party, but by that time the first party will be ready to fulfill again. This is a very cunning strategy. It is not democracy. It is politicians dividing themselves into two groups, with a subtle conspiracy – unconscious, “You rule for five years, for five years we rule.” It is just a rotating dictatorship.
Democracy, according to me, will be possible only when there are no political parties at all, and each individual decides on his own. Somebody can stand for the president of the country, but there is no party there to support him. He can approach individuals, he can explain to the country, the people, what he wants to do. And if people feel intelligently that this man has some guts and can do something, they can support him. Otherwise there is no question.
Political parties become investments. A political line becomes your commitment: you are a Democrat, somebody else is a Republican. They become almost like religions. You cannot do anything against the political party line; you have to support the president that your party has chosen. This is not democracy.
Democracy will be party-less – without politicians – and then there will be a hope that we may find people who are not interested in dominating, in dictating. Who are really interested in making people more happy, more rejoicing, richer.
But this is not democracy.
Do you consider your commune, your town of Rajneeshpuram, a democracy?
It is a democracy because there is no political party.
But all the individuals here are working together for the same purpose: from what I understand, making your ideas and your thoughts of how you're supposed to live, real.
No. My whole insistence is, never try to follow me. I am not a reliable person. Don’t believe in me, don’t believe in my words. Whatever I say, think over it. Unless it becomes your own idea and you can say, “Now this is my idea”… Work it out. Nobody here is working out my ideas. They are working out their ideas.
Which they have all gotten from you to start with.
I have not enforced them, I have not indoctrinated them. I have simply explained my vision. And my whole effort is to teach them how to doubt, how to be skeptical, how to argue, so that they can argue against me, they can be skeptical against me, they can doubt me. And if – after all this doubting, skepticism, rationality – if they find that something is true, it has already become theirs. I don’t have any monopoly on it. I may have triggered the process, but I have no monopoly on it.
This commune is being run by the people themselves. I’m not even a member of the commune. I have never gone to their commune meetings; I don’t know where their offices are. Anybody who comes here for a few hours will know more about the commune than I have known in four years, because I never go out of my room.
In the morning I come to the meeting place, where I spontaneously say whatsoever I feel like saying. I may contradict everything that I have said up to now. Nobody can say to me, “You are contradicting yourself,” because I have never promised anybody that I will not contradict. Nobody can blame me – that I am inconsistent – because I have always said that I am a growing person, continuously growing. And I have to deny every yesterday each day. How can they create a belief system?
Jesus had a few sentences which he consistently repeated his whole life. Naturally it can become a catechism. People can follow direct guidance about anything with full details. Moses gives Ten Commandments: you have just to follow, you have to have faith.
Here, doubt is the climate. This is not a place of faith. I am explaining to them what I have experienced in my life, and leaving it up to them. And I never inquire whether anybody is following my ideas or not. I’m not interested in that at all. My whole interest is that my people should be intelligent – and then their intelligence will take care. Then whatsoever they do is right, even if it goes against me. But it should not go against their intelligence.
I respect individuals. I respect their intelligence, I respect their sensitivity – so much that I will be the last person in any way to give them beliefs, dogmas, creeds, Das Kapital, Holy Bible – no.
You keep telling them to doubt everything you say and make inquiries about everything. But it seems to me, that the only thing they really don't doubt is you as a person. They keep giving you gifts, cars, their work, their money.
It is true, they cannot doubt me as a person because they have lived with me, and they have doubted enough. And they have found their doubts are meaningless as far as my being is concerned – not my thoughts. As far as a person goes, they have known me. They have experienced my love, they have known that my trust in them is immense.
Even those sannyasins who have left, I still love the same way. I still trust in them the same way. If they come back, nobody is going to ask them, “Why have you been missing for so many years?”
A few sannyasins that have left have even made negative statements about me, and journalists have asked me, “Some ex-sannyasin has made this statement…”
And I say, “If he has once been a sannyasin, then he must be right.” I respect the person. If he says that I am dishonest, then he must have found some dishonesty in me. I cannot distrust him.
Osho,
I was listening to you this morning, and you were sort of making fun of Christians, they have their Jerusalem; the Communists have their Kremlin, and Moslems have Mecca and their black rock.
But what's the difference between these religions and the communists' centers, and the town here, the temples – and you?
The difference is immense. I have communes all over the world, and I am going to create more and more communes in countries where they are not. Rajneeshpuram has no prerogative over another commune. All communes are equal. And my effort is that all the communes around the world will make the whole earth holy – not Jerusalem, not Moscow, not Mecca, but the whole earth. With less than that I cannot be satisfied.
But isn't this still a place where people come from all over the world, like pilgrims go to Jerusalem, or…
No, they do not come here as a pilgrimage. For example, in Mohammedanism it is a necessity that a Mohammedan should go to Mecca at least one time in his life. That is one of the fundamentals, otherwise he cannot enter paradise.
You will be surprised: in India, Mohammedans are very poor people. For the simple reason that Mohammed taught them something which has become absolutely outdated and irrelevant in the modern economy. He taught them that interest on money is sin. That has made all the Mohammedans in the world poor, because if you can’t get money on interest, you cannot make industries, you cannot create businesses. And who is going to give you money without interest? For what? You cannot pay interest to anybody, and you cannot take interest from anybody. So Mohammedans have remained poor, basically for this idea.
Money has to move faster. That’s why it is called currency. The faster it moves, the richer the society becomes. If I have one dollar and I go on holding onto that one dollar, then in this room there is only one dollar. But if that dollar goes on moving fast, from one person to another person – then, if there are fifty persons here, fifty dollars in a single round, fifty persons have used one dollar. And, if there are many more rounds then that much more. But why should people give money if they are not going to gain anything out of it?
So Mohammedans are very poor, but still they go to Mecca. They sell their houses, they sell their land because it is something of tremendous importance. Before they die, at least once they should go to Mecca. Without going to Mecca, there is no paradise for them.
Now, here there is no motivation. I’m not promising anything to people – that if they don’t come here they are committing some sin. They come here just to rejoice, to meet here with the same kind of people. And it is not one-way: I’m sending people from here to every commune, so it is a constant exchange. Now many sannyasins from here are in Germany, many are in Australia, many are in Italy and we exchange. If we send twenty people to a commune, then we take twenty people from that commune – for three months they will be there, for three months those people will be here.
We want to create just one commune around the earth. And we want the whole earth to be thought of as holy – not just a single small town or a small place to be holy.
That has been the wish of every religion so far, hasn't it?
No, never. Never has it been the idea of any religion that the whole earth should be holy, no.
Why, then, do the Christians send out missionaries and the Mohammedans talk about holy war, and so forth.
Yes, they are sending these people to create more Mohammedans; more Catholics, so the Vatican becomes more powerful. It is the politics of numbers. But the Vatican is not saying that Christians in India have a holy land.
You will be surprised that Indian Christians have been constantly asking the pope, “There should be an Indian church, just as there are churches in each country.” India has no church, only Christians: the church is the Vatican. All the Catholic churches in India are owned by the pope in the Vatican. They are not the property of Indian Christians.
The pope is interested in increasing more and more the number of Catholics. Mohammedans are interested… Only two religions, Jews and Hindus, because they are the oldest religions in the world – naturally, because they are the oldest religions, they never thought of conversion. There was no need. A Jew is born, a Hindu is born.
New religions came into existence – Christianity, Buddhism – and naturally they had to convert. Otherwise, from where are they going to get their numbers? Hindus and Jews have both resisted the idea of conversion for hundreds of years, but finally they had to relax. Now Hindus are converting, and trying to make people Hindus, because their numbers are shrinking. Catholics are growing, Christians are growing.
No religion has ever tried the idea that the whole earth is holy. For example Hinduism believes that except India, there is no holy country. One who is born in India is blessed: all others are condemned and cursed. The whole world is full of sinners, all the saints are born in India – that is their attitude. And then in India they have their religious capitol, Varanasi.
Is there any way to sin in this kind of society?
No, in my commune you can commit a mistake but you cannot commit a sin. Sin, as such, does not exist.
If I steal one of your cars, or if…
Yes, that is…
I rape your wife.
…a mistake. That is just a mistake, it is not a sin. And if my wife is willing to go with you, it is not even a mistake.
What if she's not?
If she is not, and you force her, then you are committing a mistake against humanity – not against God. There is no God. And because there is no God, you cannot commit a sin. Sin necessarily needs a God, a supreme person to judge. We are not judges.
It is perfectly human if you feel like escaping with my wife – if you love her, if you want her. But if she is not willing then you are doing something inhuman – a mistake of interfering into somebody’s life. And it is not going to give you any joy. A woman that has come with you unwillingly will become a pain in your neck. No hell is needed, she will give you hell.
So I don’t prescribe any rewards, I don’t judge that people will fall into hell. To err is human. I can understand that one can fall in love with somebody’s wife. And if the wife is willing, it is perfectly right. But if she is not willing, then you are doing something barbarous. For that you need not be punished; for that you have to be psychiatrically treated. That’s what we do. If somebody commits a mistake, it shows that something is wrong in his psychology. We have all kinds of therapies available. We send him to therapies so that his mind should be put right: so that he should be made more alert what he is doing, so that he should be made to understand that there is a certain territory around every individual and you should not trespass it. That’s the only way to live peacefully, lovingly.
Everybody trespassing on everybody else is what is happening around the whole world. Here, nobody is trespassing on anybody. And it is not that wives are not moving, and husbands are not changing. That is happening so fast here, as is not happening anywhere else, because freedom – if it is not even available for love, then what kind of freedom do you have? And nobody fights over the question. Here you will not find a triangle, two persons fighting for one woman. You cannot make a film story here.
I'm sure I could.
Yes, here it would be difficult to make a film story or write a novel. It would simply be flat – because if somebody falls in love with my wife, I tell him, “Take her, because there are other women who are waiting for me. So be quick, and take all her luggage, so she will not come back! I have lived with her enough, and she has lived with me enough, and we are grateful for all those beautiful moments. Now you enjoy.” Nobody has a monopoly on anybody. Each individual is a monarch, and nobody is a slave.
It sounds like a very macho and male way of looking at it.
No, this is the place where all machos have been destroyed. This place is ruled by women. If any macho comes here, within just a few days women will be chasing him and he will be escaping. It happens every day.
Osho,
Why do you think that there are more women here than men – because that's a fact, isn't it?
Certainly.
Why is it so, do you think?
I’m a man and it is natural for women to fall in love with a man. And my whole religion is a religion of love. Naturally more women have understood me immediately, directly.
There are men, but if you look deep down into those people, you will be surprised: they also are in love with me, and they have grown their repressed feminine side.
Each man is half man and half woman, and each woman is half man and half woman, because we are born between two polarities – the mother and the father. They both contribute to your being. And this is one of the greatest contributions of Carl Gustav Jung to the modern age, that…
I didn't get that.
Carl Gustav Jung.
I don't know him.
You don’t know him?
No.
You must know him, because he’s one of the persons since Sigmund Freud, who has really contributed significant ideas. This is one of his greatest contributions – although it is not new. In India, that idea has been in existence for five thousand years. On my dining table is a statue somebody has sent me – half man, half woman. That statue is ancient, and that has been the idea. But Jung introduced it in the West.
The men who are here are not here because they are men, but because somehow I have managed for their woman to surface – because my whole approach is of the heart it is more difficult for men to be in communion with me. In the beginning they have to start with the head, but slowly, slowly I persuade them to go deeper toward the heart. And the distance is not much, just a few inches. Once they get to the heart… The heart is always feminine, the head is always macho.
So, certainly there is a greater proportion of women here than anywhere else. You will not find such juicy women anywhere else in the world, because their womanhood has for the first time become respected, for the first time, liberated. For the first time, they are not thought to be second-class citizens. On the contrary they are running the whole commune. It is more a matriarchy than a patriarchy. And they are doing so well that it is a proof that if we had allowed women to participate in all the affairs of men all through history, the world would have been immensely richer.
Half of humanity has been crippled: they could not produce painters, singers, musicians, they could not produce scientists, they could not produce mystics. Not a single woman has founded a religion. In fact, even someone like Jesus, who talked about love, did not allow a single woman among his twelve apostles. And those twelve apostles escaped when he was crucified. When his body was brought down there were three women – not a single man. Those three women brought down the body, but they are not even accepted as saints. The Christian trinity has no woman in it.
What I am saying is that if women were allowed the way they are allowed in this commune, their contribution would have been tremendous. The heart can do a few things which the head cannot do, and all the great values belong to the heart. Compassion, love, beauty, kindness, sympathy – all the great values belong to the heart. The head is simply a computer: it is good at mathematics, it is good in a scientific lab.
So many women are here, and they have been more reliable than men.
Reliable in what way?
In every way. They will not leave me for any reason – because they have not joined me for any reason at all. A man first joins me because he feels convinced that I am intellectually right. The woman feels me as a person who can be trusted. She has nothing to do with intellectual conviction.
Now, if tomorrow I change my ideas, the person who yesterday was convinced will leave – because he was convinced by an idea and the idea has changed. The woman is convinced with my being, which is still the same, and will remain always the same. She has no need to change.
For example, I went into silence for three and a half years. A few men dropped out because they had become addicted to my words – but I was silent, and perhaps I would never speak again, so what was the point of hanging around here? They escaped. But the women were the same, whether I was speaking or not. Their love remained the same because it was not based on any intellectual ground. It was a heart-to-heart feeling.
One more thing I would like you to remember: that the men who are here are almost feminine, for the simple reason that I have changed their approach toward life. It is no longer reason, it is no longer logic. It is love, it is feeling. Unknowingly their woman – who had been repressed – has surfaced. That has also created a few problems. It has solved a few complexities, but it has created some new problems. For example, if a man’s repressed woman inside surfaces, he is no longer interested in other women, because that will be lesbianism. He’s man…
So instead he's interested in other men?
Yes, so that is the trouble. But the other man is also…
What's the trouble with being interested in other men?
Because that other man is also feminine.
But everybody here is feminine.
Yes, that’s what I am saying.
So they've got each other.
That’s what I am saying, that this is a really gay society.
So what about all the left-over women who don't have any men?
Nobody is left over.
That's not the right word to use, maybe. But since a lot of the men are gay…
No, no, nobody is gay. Nobody is gay.
I mean that everybody is so blissed out that it does not matter. People love each other, but their love and its qualities have become more feminine. It is not a macho man loving a repressed woman who is almost a slave – no. A man loves a woman, but his love also has become more delicate, softer, more human.
For example, in India a certain ethic has been followed for ten thousand years. Manu must have been a great thinker, he wrote all the laws that have to be followed by Hindus. One law is that once in a while the husband must beat the wife. Strange. When I came across that law I could not believe it. What is he talking about? But when I came to understand women, I immediately understood that he’s right! A woman loses interest in you if you are not macho.
Do you believe in that?
No, I don’t believe in that. That’s how it has been happening down the centuries. Include my commune out! I’m talking about the whole of humanity. That’s what has been happening: the woman wants the man to be strong, just as the man wants the woman to be beautiful. The woman wants the man to be strong, a hero, and she wants him to prove it. A woman immediately loses interest in a hen-pecked husband. He’s not worth…
It is a very complex situation. Every woman tries to reduce the husband into a hen-pecked husband. It is a conflict of power, politics – who is dominating. So unknowingly she tries to reduce the man into a hen-pecked husband. And it is not difficult. It is very easy for a woman to reduce any strong person – he may be Muhammad Ali the Great or anybody – because her ways are such: screaming, crying, weeping, throwing things.
The man comes home tired after working the whole day and here he faces this scene. He may be right but he apologizes: he may ask to be forgiven. He says, “I am sorry, I was wrong.” Otherwise he is not going to be allowed to sleep the whole night. And tomorrow morning he will not get tea – and what about lunch? The woman in the house has all the power. So the situation is that every husband finally finds himself just a mouse in the house. Outside he may be a lion, but inside the house a great transformation comes immediately.
Here in my commune, the feminine qualities of the men have come to the surface. The feminine qualities of the woman have received respect and dignity. Both have become, in a certain way, whole. As the woman receives respect and dignity, her inner side – the other side, the male side – also comes to the surface. She shows strength. She’s no longer weak: she’s no longer the fair sex. She’s not just a lady. Here you will find women and men – no gentlemen, no ladies, those words are prohibited; just raw people, without any hypocrisy. And because everybody is trying to understand himself, in that very effort he understands others too. Understanding each other gives freedom to each other, destroys jealousies, destroys clingings.
Understanding is psychological health, and my people are psychologically healthy. They can accept anything that appeals to their understanding; there is no problem in it. If the woman wants to go with somebody else, she need not escape in the darkness of the night. She can talk to her husband – they have that intimacy, she knows that he will understand. There is no need to escape. And the man will feel grateful that the woman trusted him. Even in such a moment – when she is dropping him – she still respects him, still trusts him. And their friendship continues.
So, here you will find many people who have changed their wives and husbands, but their friendship remains just the same. And you can fall again in love with the same woman, there is no problem!
Osho,
I'd like to ask you another thing: how do you personally feel about living with your luxury cars, your nice watch, the good food; and your creating luxury, both for you, and for the people that live here – at the same time as millions of children are dying every day from starvation in this world?
Aren't you a little concentrated just to yourself?
Yes.
And that's the way you want to have it?
Those people are dying because of their stupidity…
The children…
…and I’m not responsible for it, the pope is responsible for it – because the Christian leaders, Jewish rabbis, Hindu leaders, Mohammedan imams, are all preaching against birth control, against abortion. They are the people who are creating an ugly, poor world; they are responsible for it.
Not a single child has been born in this commune in four years. And nobody is prohibited – just a simple understanding. The world is so over-populated; if you have any understanding you will not increase the population, you will make every effort for the population to drop.
But all the religious leaders around the world without exception are trying to increase the population. They want more poor people because poor people can be converted.
In India I tried, but I could not find a single rich man who had been converted to Christianity. Only beggars – Christianity needs beggars; only orphans – Mother Teresa needs orphans. Mother Teresa is against birth control, abortion. She has to be, otherwise from where this supply of orphans is going to come? These people are responsible. Thousands of people are dying, but I don’t feel any responsibility.
In fact for thirty years in India I was teaching birth control, abortion – and people were throwing stones at me, shoes at me, knives at me. They made attempts to kill me because I was destroying their morality. If this is their morality then they are responsible. So die for your morality.
Whatever I could do as an individual, I have done. And found that there are only walls. Nobody is going to listen, it is simply absurd. Those people are going to be hungry, and those people are going to die, and that’s how it is going to be. I’ve dropped that idea completely.
And then I started the movement of sannyas.
When was that?
It was in 1970, when I became completely fed up with those idiots who didn’t understand, and were not ready even for a dialogue. I had challenged all the Hindu leaders, Buddhist leaders, Jaina leaders that I wanted an open dialogue. But nobody was ready to discuss because they knew what they were saying was simply illogical, it was meaningless. And they are going to create a country of poor people. Right now fifty percent of Indians are ready to become another Ethiopia any day. But I don’t feel responsible, because for thirty years I have been talking to these people, talking to their leaders, talking to their religious leaders.

Indira Gandhi was in touch with me and she was convinced of whatever I was saying. She told me, “You are right, but we cannot do anything – because if we do anything then the Hindu votes will be gone out of our hands, the Mohammedan votes will be gone out of hands, the Christian votes will be gone out of our hands. I will be finished.” She asked me, “Do you want me to be finished?”
I said, “If I was in your place, either I would do something or I would simply resign, because there is no point: if I cannot do what is right, then what is the need for me to remain as prime minister of the country? Then let somebody else who can do something.”
They're all criminals.
Perhaps some criminal may be able to do it. Perhaps India needs an Adolf Hitler who can do it – the question is how to reduce the population.
The problem is that there are too many people, not that the resources are…
The resources are almost nil. And there is no way – they won’t allow the resources to be nourished again. Religious people have strange ideas. For example, in India they will not use manure in which bone powder is mixed – because bones, that is violence.

You will be surprised to know that in the twentieth century, one of the Hindu leaders – the most respected Hindu leader, Swami Karpatri – was teaching…
I was present in the meeting, and I had to contradict him. I created thousands of enemies because of that. A new dam was being made just a few miles away, and that place was going to be the most benefited because of the dam – because their lands were dry and the rains were not certain, and they would be getting as much water as they wanted. And the man was saying to them, “Don’t accept that water, because before giving you the water they take the electricity out of it.”
Now to the people he was saying that that water is impotent – its whole potential has been taken out. “It is dangerous for you to take that water – refuse.” And the people looked convinced, because without an education they wouldn’t understand that electricity is not something you take out of the water. It is not something like sexual potentiality, that you can take out of a man and he becomes impotent. But this simile convinced them, and they were raising their hands in support.
I had to stand up and I asked him, “Do you understand what you are saying? And what do you understand about electricity? What do you understand when electricity is produced by a hydroelectric plant?”
I told the people, “The only argument against this man will be: this year accept the water and see your crops. Those crops will prove this man your enemy. There is no other way. If the crops don’t come, if you drink the water and the thirst does not go, then of course he is right.”
He was very angry. He was so angry that he wrote a whole book about everything, against me.

These people are responsible for poverty, for dying children. And all the religions of the world have been preaching poverty in some way or other in their history.
I want to change this whole approach. I’m all for comfort, luxury, richness, wealth, technology, science. I’m not for renunciation; I’m for rejoicing. I want people to live as richly as possible in all dimensions. And my communes are going to be models, to prove to the world that it is possible. These are the same people; they just need the right attitude, and they can create wealth.
When we came here this land had been lying useless for fifty years. Just see the stupid mind of the politicians: nobody ever bothers – so much land, one hundred and twenty-six square miles, just lying dead. It was for sale and nobody was ready to purchase it because it was a desert. We got it. There was only one house when we got it. Now there are houses for five thousand people, all fully air-conditioned. We made all the roads. We have made a beautiful hospital, a beautiful school. We grow our food, we are self-sufficient; we grow our vegetables, we are self-sufficient. We have our own cows, our own milk, our own butter. We are trying everything.
And the Oregon government is creating every kind of hindrance, according to their land use laws. One simply thinks, “Is this a madhouse that we are living in?” We have used the land. For fifty years nobody bothered that the land was not used: it was according to the land use laws. We have used it, we have made it productive, and we have committed a crime – because it is not according to land use laws. It seems as if man exists for laws, not laws for man.
I have invited the governor, the attorney general: “Come and see, and tell us that this is misuse of land. We don’t bother about laws. The question is that we have made a desert into an oasis, and rather than appreciating it, you are putting case upon case in the courts.” And none of them have come here. They don’t even have the guts, because they know that what we have done is right. And if they are at all reasonable they should change their laws. If their laws don’t fit, they have to be changed.
But they want to change us, not their laws. And these people will say that we are responsible for poverty in the world. We can make the whole world an oasis. Wherever you want, give us land, and I will send my people. I have one million sannyasins around the world, and we will change any kind of place into a beautiful oasis.
I told Indira, “Give me all the power. Simply retire. Within ten years I can change this whole country.” But who wants to give up power?
Nobody, it seems like.
Yes.
Osho,
Could I ask you another question: what do you think will happen when the time comes that you die? Will these people that are with you now continue your ideas and your thoughts? Is there anybody who's going to take over your position of the one that comes up with ideas? I mean, your books are useless because they're all contradicting each other!
They are. That’s why I have been contradicting, so that they should not remain useful in any way – because if they are useful they will become Holy Bibles. They have to be contradictory. I’m making every arrangement that nobody can derive any theology, philosophy out of them. One can enjoy them, just the way one enjoys a flower, a cloud, a sunrise; one can enjoy them as a painting, but one cannot worship them.
And as far as I’m concerned, I never think of tomorrow. So the question of what will happen after my death does not concern me at all. My concern is that this moment I can help my people to be as intelligent as possible, and their intelligence will take care.
I’m not concerned and I’m not going to give them detailed ideas and plans. My approach is – for example, if a blind man asks me, “Where is the door? Then do I have to turn right or left to find the road? And where then have I to go to reach the post office?” My approach is not to give him all those details. My approach is to take him to the hospital. If it is possible to cure his eyes, then he will be able to find the post office or anything else that he wants.
I’m not giving my people any detailed program or any idea what they have to do when I am not here. In fact, even when I am here, they are doing things on their own. I am not…so they will not miss me as far as work is concerned; they are already doing it without me.
I have never entered their offices, either in India or here. I have never looked to see what they are doing. I simply trust in human intelligence. My effort is to sharpen it as much as possible. And that certainly I cannot do after my death, so I have to do it before my death.
Can you call it intelligence to kill fifty percent of the population of India?
Certainly: not fifty percent – fifty percent for India, seventy-five percent for the whole world.
Only one-fourth of the population can live on this earth peacefully, comfortably, luxuriously. I don’t want that you should kill these people by throwing bombs. I don’t want to create Hiroshimas, Nagasakis – which you will have to if you don’t listen to me.
I would like every government to help the starving people to die peacefully. Give them a sleeping dose so they go into a deep sleep, and the sleep turns into death. At least give them a beautiful death. You could not give them a beautiful life, but you can give them a beautiful death, with music and flowers, good food. At least once in their life give them the best that they always wanted. And let them depart.
And once this population comes to a balance, then keep the balance; then don’t allow each and everybody to go on producing like animals. They have to take permission from the medical board, and unless the medical board supports that that child will be healthy, intelligent, they cannot have it. And no couple can be allowed to have more than two children, to replace themselves.
Within ten years, we can make this world totally different. You will just have to drop your ideas about morality, religion, death, sin. If you carry all those old ideas, then wait for the nuclear weapons; they will do the work, and they will not ask about your morality, and they will not bother to give you a beautiful death either. They will give you the worst death possible. So why wait for that?
I’m not being inhuman when I say it. It is out of absolute compassion that I am saying it. It is simply ugly to somehow keep hungry people alive, because they never come up to the survival level. At the most you can manage below the survival level.
Excuse me, do you think it's better to have one-fourth of the earth's population living in luxury than having the total population living fairly well?
Not fairly well – it is not possible. That is not the alternative. The alternative is twenty-five percent of humanity living in absolute comfort and luxury, or the whole world living in misery, poverty, war, death – and finally a global suicide. These are the alternatives.
It seems that we accept things which we are not doing, whether they are moral or immoral. For example, if a world war starts, nobody will bother about morality or immorality. It will not kill seventy-five percent of the people, it will kill one hundred percent of life – trees, birds, animals, who have not done any wrong to you, who are not part of your politics, who are not Americans, and who are not Russians. Those poor people will be unnecessarily destroyed, and nobody will think whether it is moral or immoral.
I’m suggesting a very compassionate idea. If a country cannot manage to live, then it is better for that country to silently die. Why cling to life? For what? Without Ethiopia, the world will not be losing anything – because what has come out of Ethiopia? Except hunger, poverty, continuous rape, murder, crime, what has come out of Ethiopia?
I'm not sure about Ethiopia, but I'm sure that natural resources came out of lots of the countries that are now starving.
That too came only when the population was balanced, not now. India has given so much to the whole world, but the population was so small. In Buddha’s time – and that was the peak of India’s glory – the whole population consisted of two hundred million people. And India included Pakistan, Bangladesh, Nepal, Bhutan, Sikkim. It was almost double what it is now, and the whole population was two hundred million. Now India’s population alone is eight hundred million. Pakistan is not included, Bangladesh is not included, Bhutan, Nepal are not included. If you include them too, then it will go beyond a billion.
It was possible in Buddha’s time to contribute to the world, and India contributed much. It contributed philosophy, it contributed music, it contributed poetry, literature, sculpture – everything. But the population was small, and the resources so much that people had to do something creative. Life was comfortable. People could paint, people could make statues.
It is so surprising to see an ancient temple like Khajuraho. In Khajuraho there were 120 temples: only 30 have survived, the others are ruins. But even to create one temple like that seems to be impossible. It is such a work; it must have taken thousands of first-rate artists and craftsmen, because each inch of the temple is carved. There are millions of statues in a single temple. All the walls are made of statues. And what statues! Nowhere else have such beautiful statues been created. Those people must have been very comfortable: no worry about food, no worry about anything else, and they could concentrate – and they made 120 temples. All over India, there are thousands of temples like that. But it happened when the country was in a situation where the resources were more, riches were more. Just by a little effort enough was produced.
But what can India contribute now? It is a bankrupt country. It can only suck and exploit the sympathy of the whole world. That’s what it has been doing for forty years, since independence. Its bank loans go on increasing, and everybody knows they cannot be returned, there is no way to return them. It goes on begging from every country for support, knowing perfectly well there is no way to pay it back. For how long is this going to happen? The best way is to take some measures there.
For example, for twenty years make it absolutely illegal to have children. Just for twenty years. If there are no children born in twenty years – and in twenty years, millions of old people will die – the situation will change. You will not necessarily have to kill them: just be a little more scientific, and a little less superstitious.
I don’t see that there is any problem in the world which is insoluble. All the problems are made by us. And because we go on clinging to our old ideas, those problems go on standing there. And they go becoming bigger and bigger. There is every possibility that perhaps we will not be able to live at all by the end of the century. This is going to be a real calamity, because in the whole universe this is the only place where life has reached to consciousness.
This is the only place. The whole universe is dead in a way. This small planet is something special: not only life, but consciousness; not only consciousness, but ultimate peaks of enlightenment have happened on this earth. And these idiots are going to destroy it. This is not only against the earth, it is against the whole of existence and the whole universe – because once life disappears from earth, the whole universe will be just a big graveyard, infinite; all those stars are dead.
We are certainly privileged. And to miss this opportunity because of small, stupid things – communism, democracy, Christianity, Judaism, just small things… We can drop all those things. My solution is one world, one government, no political parties, and we would have solved everything without any difficulty.
Osho,
I'm not going to ask you how to put a government together without any political parties, because that would probably be a long answer.
So I'll just go into something completely different: I've been told that you have made a lot of statements about people from different nationalities. It would be interesting to hear what you've said about Swedish people, and maybe especially about the Swedish sannyasins that you've met.
I have to go there, because Sweden is one of the countries which is the most backward as far as sannyas is concerned.
It's backward?
As far as sannyas is concerned, it is the most backward. We have very few sannyasins there, so I’m thinking to come.
I'm sure there are a lot of people that would like to meet you. In what sense is it backwards? As of being sannyasins?
Yes, only in that sense – and I’m interested only in that.
But what makes Sweden more backward than Germany, for instance, where you have a lot of…
In Germany I have the biggest communes – and the reason is Adolf Hitler. Sweden has missed an Adolf Hitler. In Germany he made way for me – not knowing that he was making the way for a strange man.
The German youth is fed up with the politicians because they have had to suffer two world wars. All those politicians were promising them that they are special people, that they are born to rule the world. And they got exploited by those promises.
Adolf Hitler was not only a political leader, he was even trying to be a prophet. He was declaring himself a reincarnation of an Old Testament prophet, Elijah. The German youth is totally frustrated with prophets, messiahs, political leaders. And that’s how they immediately become interested in me – because I am against religions, against prophets, against messiahs, against the whole past. And Germany’s past in these wars has been of so much suffering that they are more open to receive me.
Sweden has not suffered, is not yet frustrated, is still comfortably satisfied the way things are. That’s the problem, and that’s where they will remain backward. Countries like Sweden who are in a certain way comfortably well – not hungry and dying like Ethiopia, or rich, super-rich, like America, but just a middle class… The middle class is the least revolutionary class in the world. They cannot do anything rebellious, because the psychology of the middle class is that they can always hope to reach the higher rungs. They can become richer, and richer. There is hope for the middle class to become rich.
Isn't that Karl Marx?
No, Karl Marx never bothered about the middle class. That’s why he completely missed with everything in his philosophy. Otherwise he would have been the right person. But because he never bothered about the middle class, he thought of the poor – the proletariat; he thought of the capitalist – the bourgeois. His idea was that sooner or later, the middle class would disappear. A few would become rich, more would become poor. He never thought that the middle class was going to stay. It is a shifting class, so he never bothered about it. And that is where he missed completely.
The middle class has not disappeared. On the contrary, the middle class is growing. A few poor people join it, a few rich people join it. Because a few rich people are falling down, a few poor people are rising up, the middle class is becoming bigger and bigger. In fact, the rich are just one pole. The poor are the other pole; that’s why revolution is not possible in America.
Marx used to think that America would be the first to go through a revolution. He had never dreamed that a poor country like Russia would do the revolution. It was out of his imagination, because it was so poor and there was no rich class, so a class struggle was not possible. But he could not see this point: that if the middle class, instead of disappearing – a few become rich and the remaining become poor, and this creates a gap – he could not think that the opposite is also possible. A few from the poor become middle class, a few from the rich become middle class, and the middle class goes on becoming bigger and bigger. And the middle class never disturbs any status quo.
Sweden is a middle-class country. It cannot be revolutionary.
Do you consider your own movement a revolution?
My movement is absolute revolution.
So your movement could never turn Sweden around, so to speak?
No, we will try. We will do our best, because it is only a question of creating a longing that life can be lived more intensely. And I’m not telling them that for the future, but now. My appeal is difficult for the poor. I cannot convert the poor person into a sannyasin – that’s very difficult because to tell him to live in the moment is to tell him to live in hunger. To him I can only say to die in the moment, because for living you have nothing.
But I have tremendous possibilities for middle class people. Once they start understanding me they will see the point very easily.
The super-rich are also out of my game. Marx’s whole ideology was dependent on the poor and the rich, and my whole approach is dependent on the middle class. The question is just of a different past in different countries. Germany proved good because Adolf Hitler has done so much harm, and has left such a space in the soul of the German youth. So it was easy. I have never been to Germany; Germany has been coming to me. But to Sweden I will come.
Don't you think you scare some of the German young people here, when you're talking about how it would be good for the world – for India, for instance – to have an Adolf Hitler-type person to help the situation?
I don’t care. My whole life has been disturbing people, shocking people – and these people particularly are immune. They have gone through so many shocks, that now they go on sleeping well, soundly, without any disturbance.
Osho,
This morning you said something about, “Believing is just carrying on knowledge from somebody else.” But isn't that exactly what these sannyasins are doing?
No.
They're taking your knowledge to themselves.
No.
No?
They are not: they are experimenting, they are meditating – and unless they experience, they are not allowed to spread anything. It is none of their business. I am enough, alone. I have my ways. Just sitting here in this chair I can flood the whole world with my ideas. What is the need for them? They have to experience first. Unless it becomes their own, they are not to become missionaries. I hate the word missionary. Each sannyasin should speak on his own authority. Then, there is strength.
I have seen very famous missionaries, but without any strength. In India, Stanley Jones – a world-famous man – was living. Perhaps he was the most cultured missionary, very philosophical, rational, compared to these idiots like Billy Graham. He was certainly a man worth considering. I used to go because he had an ashram in the Himalayas, so whenever I used to pass that way I would go there. He loved me, and he always wanted me to come and be there.

One day I was sitting in the garden with him, taking breakfast. And I told him, “This is something that perhaps will disturb you, but whatever you teach and whatever you preach – I have gone through your books, I have listened to your talks, but it is not your experience. It is all accumulated knowledge, borrowed. You have done well, you are a great scholar – whatever you say is perfectly in tune with the scriptures, but you don’t have any experience of it.”
The Bible was always sitting on the table by his side – always. So I took his hand and put it on the Bible, and I said, “Take an oath.”
He was nervous, but he was an honest man. He said, “You are right. It is not my experience.”

Now, if it is not your experience, from where are you going to have strength? Books, and knowledge derived from books, cannot be your strength. I want my people to be strong, so that if somebody does the same thing as I did to Stanley Jones, they need not say, “It is not our experience. We have believed in a master and we are repeating like parrots.”
No, that would be ugly. I would not like these people to say that. It is better to say, “I don’t know.” Unless you know, don’t bother to say anything to anybody. When you know, you will have to say – because then you become just like a rain cloud which is so full of water that it has to rain somewhere or other.
The moment you know, you become a rain cloud, and then it is something totally different. You are not a missionary: you are not changing anybody, and trying to convert him to your faith. You don’t have any faith, you have a certain experience. And out of sheer love you are sharing it. If that sharing transforms the man, that is a different thing. It is not conversion, it is transformation.
Okay?
Thank you.
Come again.

============================================================

Prem Isabel,
Rajneeshpuram, Oregon, United States
Osho,
Is it not aggressive to try and change the world to save it?
It is aggressive. Even the effort to change a single individual is aggressive. Who are you to decide what is right for a certain person? Who are you to decide that the world, if changed according to you, will be a better world?
It is taking upon yourself the role of a savior. It is a very unconscious way of dominating people – for their own sake, of course, so they cannot even rebel against you. Every parent is doing that to the children. For their own sake he is disciplining them, forcing them to do things that they don’t want to do, imposing a certain religion upon them without their consent. In every possible way their freedom is being cut. Less freedom, less individuality – and the moment the child becomes one hundred percent obedient, he has died.
In his disobedience was his life. In his rebellion was his being. And you cannot say that the intentions of the parents are wrong. I never suspect anybody’s intentions, but that is not the question at all. The question is what is the result? The intention is something inside you. You can have all good or bad intentions – just keep them to yourself. The moment you start acting on them, the good intentions are far more dangerous than the bad intentions – because a bad intention can immediately be retaliated, condemned, not only by the person you are imposing it on, but even by those who are eyewitnesses to it. But a good intention is very dangerous.
Both are doing the same work, destroying the freedom of the individual to be himself, so their nature is not in any way different. But against bad intentions rebellion is possible, and will be supported by everyone; but against good intentions rebellion becomes impossible. Everybody will be supporting the people of good intentions, who are destroying the individual. Nobody will come to his support.
It is none of our business to save the world. In the first place, we never created it. It is none of our responsibility where it goes and what happens to it. Our only responsibility is that while we are here, we live a life of joy, love, blissfulness. While we are here, our responsibility is to know who we are and what this life is all about. And the miracle is, in doing that you are already changing the world – without being aggressive.
There is no idea of changing anywhere, so the question of aggression does not arise. You don’t have even a vague conception of changing the world and making it according to yourself. You are simply living your life, of which you are the master. You are trying to live as intensely and as totally as possible, because life is so short and the next moment is so uncertain, that we have to take every moment as if it is the last moment.
Just the very idea – as if it is the last moment – will transform you. Then there is no need to be jealous, no need to be angry. In the last moment of life, who wants to be angry and jealous, sad and miserable? In the last moment of life, naturally all grudges and all complaints about life disappear. If each moment is taken as the last – as it should be because the next is uncertain – you are changing yourself, and your change is going to be infectious. It may change the whole world, but you had never intended it to. That is my way of changing the world without being aggressive.
Otherwise, up to now all reformers, revolutionaries, messiahs were violent, aggressive. They were bent upon saving you. They never even asked you whether you wanted to be saved or not; you were just something that they had to decide for. Who has given them the authority? They have not asked even your permission. And if you don’t change according to them, they are willing to throw you into dark, dismal hell forever.
And, of course, if you are willing – willing to commit a spiritual suicide and become just a shadow to these people – they are giving you all the rewards that you can imagine in paradise. Hindus have tried to change the world, Christians have tried to change the world; all the religions have been doing it. Communism, socialism, fascism, all have been doing it.
My sannyasins have to be totally different: a new phenomenon in the world, not interfering with anybody’s life, and yet transforming the whole world. This is real magic. You never intended, you never imposed, you never interfered, you never trespassed on anybody. You never made any judgment: “You are wrong and I am going to put you right.” You were never concerned. That is his business; that is his life. If somebody wants to destroy it, he has the right to destroy it. If somebody wants to live stupidly, then he is perfectly right to do that. It is his life. How he spends it, how he lives it, or if he remains almost dead, asleep from the cradle to the grave, that too is his life and he is the master of it. So my people have not to interfere into anybody’s life.
I have found a totally different approach to changing the world: just change yourself. And when you are rejoicing and dancing, you will find that somebody by your side has started dancing with you, because we are all the same human consciousness with the same potential. Nobody is a foreigner. We may speak different languages, but we understand one language. So when you are happy, smiling, the other – who may not be smiling – suddenly feels a smile come to his face. You may be a stranger, but you smiled at the person, you waved at the person. You have changed the person without his knowing it, without your intending it.
Great masters like Lao Tzu, Chuang Tzu, Lieh Tzu, have called this “action without action.” You are not taking any action, yet something is happening. And when things happen on their own they have a beauty, because deep down there is freedom. If the person waved, if the person smiled – you were not asking him, he was totally free not to look at you, but there is a synchronicity between heart and heart.
Knowing that secret of synchronicity, I am introducing a totally new kind of revolution. Change yourself, and in that very change you have changed a part of the world. You are a part of the world. If your change is something that makes you rich, makes you joyous, makes you blissful, makes you a song, then it is difficult for others to resist singing with you, dancing with you, blossoming with you. A single individual can transform the whole world without ever mentioning the word transformation.
I started the journey alone. I have not knocked on anybody’s door to come with me, but strangely, people started coming, and the caravan started becoming bigger and bigger. They came on their own. If they have lived with me, that was their decision; if they want to leave there is no problem, they are as free as ever.
We have already started the world going into a new phase of human history. We are not aggressive, we are not trying to change the world. We are not even interested in the world; we are just living our life, enjoying our life – we are utterly selfish. Still, what has not happened in thousands of years is possible through us. But it will be action without action, a transformation which has not been intended, which has not been imposed. A transformation that has spread on its own and people have understood what it is, because, deep down, every heart speaks the same language.
Osho,
It seems that politicians talk like priests, and priests act like politicians. Is there any separation between church and state?
They are not different people. They are the same type of people, with the same desire, the same lust for power. But they have chosen different areas.
The politician has chosen the mundane world. It has been an unspoken contract that they will not interfere in the religious realm, and they hope that religion will not interfere in their world. The contract has been good, and they are both trying to dominate humanity. One is concerned with the outside world, the other is concerned with the inside world. Their worlds don’t overlap, so there is no conflict. In fact, throughout history they have been supporting each other. The priest has been blessing the politicians, the politicians have been praising the priests.
And sometimes the situation becomes so ridiculous, unbelievable. In the Second World War the German Christian archbishop was blessing Adolf Hitler, and praying to God that Germany win. And the same religion in England and the same kind of archbishop was praying for England, wanting victory for England and defeat for Germany. Their God is one, their religion is one, but the problem is that the German priest has a contract with the German politician, and the English priest has a contract with the English politicians. Who bothers about God?
In fact, the priests are the most atheistic people in the world. They know perfectly well that there is no God. They know better than anybody, because that is their business. But they have to pretend that there is a God. Without God they lose authority. It is in the name of God that they are archbishops, popes and shankaracharyas. If there is no God, then who are they? – just ordinary people, suddenly reduced to nothing. So the lie has to be kept alive.
You can see that in such situations both archbishops knew perfectly well that God was not the question. And nobody was bothered about God; the question was politics. Otherwise, they should have refused. Both should have asked, “How can we ask for the victory of Germany or England? Our God is one. How can our prayers be so contradictory? Our religion is one, our foundation is one, our churches are one, our master Jesus Christ is one. How can we do what you are asking us?”
But nobody raised the question. They did it because neither God nor Jesus Christ means anything. What means something is your vested interest. The German archbishop has his vested interest in Germany, not in England. He has to support Adolf Hitler. The English archbishop has to support England and its politicians. And these people go on paying their tributes in return.
The archbishop of England will crown the king; just a formality, but at least in the eyes of the mediocre crowds he is more powerful because he crowns the king – he is a kingmaker. He knows perfectly well that the king can throw him out any moment; he needs the king’s support. And the support is given, because the king needs the support of the priest. The masses believe in God, the masses believe in the bishop, the masses go to church. If the king wants to remain a king, then there has to be a mutual contract between the priest and the king.
And this has been the same all along. Political ideologies have changed – kings and queens have disappeared, presidents, prime ministers have appeared – but the basic contract is still carried. The American president before taking the oath of the president, goes to the chief priest to be blessed. After his blessing he will take an oath in the name of God and become the president of the country. In this way he is politically powerful, and he has the support of the religious masses.
The poor people don’t have any idea what kind of contract has been going on down the ages. And the contract was possible because both priest and politician are desirous of power. Lust for power is their common ground. It is easier to divide with a line so that they don’t conflict, since that conflict may destroy the possibility of being in power for both.
For example, in India things have been very clear. For five thousand years the politician and the priest have been in the same business. In India Hinduism divided the society into four classes. The first class is of the brahmins, the priests. They are the highest people. They own nothing; brahmins are poor, but their ego is tremendously fulfilled – they are the highest people.
Even the king is lower, because kings belong to the second category of people, the warriors, the kshatriyas. They have all the power, all the money, but they accept the priest as higher than themselves. They go and touch the feet of the priest, because this way the masses, who are following the priests and the religion, are for the king. What humility, what humbleness! And it is sheer politics.
The third class is that of the businessman. The brahmin is poor because whatsoever he does cannot create wealth. He prays for people, arranges marriage. From birth to death, he does every kind of ritual; that is his profession, but out of that he cannot become rich. Poor people are all around. How much can you exploit them? They have been sucked for centuries, and the brahmin is only a parasite. But the poor masses don’t have blood anymore.
So the third position in the society is given to the businessman, who is the richest – richer than the warriors, richer than the brahmins. Because of his richness he is accepted as just below the kings. In India kings have been borrowing money from businessmen. There were no banks in the past; the business people had all the money. They were providing kingdoms with all the money they needed, on loan, on rent, on interest. The king needs money for the army, for new invasions; the king needs money for all his glory and show, marble palaces, golden thrones. From where is he going to get it? The poor brahmin cannot give it to him; the poor brahmin is used as the support for the masses. Businessmen cannot be used for that purpose, because the masses are poor, and are always against the rich.
Even ten thousand years before Karl Marx, the poor man was always a communist. He may not know the word, but he can see that he is being exploited. He works hard from morning till evening. He works the whole year, and then too he is hungry. He produces everything, but everything is taken away by the businessman, because the businessman has provided him with seeds. The businessman gave him money for his daughter’s marriage. So all the poor people are in debt to the businessman; they cannot revolt, but they cannot love the rich man either. They can see what is happening. They are not blind. The poor people are the fourth class, the lowest.
There is a good arrangement: no movement is possible from one class into another. The lowest, the fourth class – the sudras, untouchables – is prohibited from education because with education he may start having ambitions. Then why should he go on cleaning people’s toilets when he can become a teacher in a school? If he is well qualified to be a professor in the university, then why he should go on making shoes for people? It is better to prohibit him from the very beginning, so sudras are prohibited from education.
This fourth class is the biggest class, half of the whole population. They cannot marry into higher castes, they cannot sit on the same platform with higher class people. Even their shadows are dirty. If an untouchable passes by your side and his shadow touches you – just his shadow touches you, not him – you have to take a bath. He is reduced into an almost inhuman being. He supplies everything, he produces everything; he weaves the cloth, he makes the shoes, he cleans your streets. He does every kind of work that is needed by all three classes.
The businessman is the mediator. He exploits, he accumulates money. He is happy, although he is third in position. He can purchase the king; he can purchase the brahmin; who bothers that he is third grade? He knows perfectly well that money is the highest power. The king is indebted to him and the priest has to depend on him, so deep down he is absolutely contented. He is really on the top, but let others enjoy the idea that they are on the top. What does it matter? What matters is reality.
The poor brahmin is contented although he is poor; he is contented because he is the highest class. His ego is fulfilled. The king does not care about the priest because the sword is in his hand. He can make the priest do anything he wants. It is just a courtesy that he touches his feet; otherwise, he can cut off his head. The brahmin also knows it.
The king is not worried that he is second class, even though he is king. He knows that it does not matter what class you put him in; he is the master. He can kill the priest. He can take all the money from the business people. It is just a courtesy that he takes it on interest, and never pays it – no king has ever paid back. There is no need. You cannot ask, he has all the power in his sword. For centuries he has been taking money and never paying it back, so whatever interest you want, he is willing to give. He is going to give neither the original money nor the interest. Nobody has ever done it; it is just not done.
But the businessman can enjoy the idea that the king is indebted to him. Without him he cannot rule the empire. It is his money and his power, and naturally he takes advantage of it. Licenses will be given to him; he will have first chance in every opportunity, because the king depends on him for money. It is a beautiful and very psychological arrangement that all feel great, all feel on the top.
The sudra, who is the fourth, also feels deep down that without him the society will die. He is the producer of food, of clothes, of everything. So let these idiots think that they are on the top, but they are all dependent on him. They eat the food he grows, they live in the houses he makes, they wear the clothes he weaves. Without him, the businessman, the king, the priest – all will have to commit suicide. So he may be poor, he may be dehumanized in every way, but he understands that this is all just formality; it makes no difference, he is the real power.
So everybody is satisfied deep down, and that’s why revolution never happened in India, and cannot happen. In every country where revolution happens, it is the intelligentsia of the country which provokes it. They don’t do the revolution, but they give the ideology. But in India the brahmin is the intelligentsia. Every revolution will go against him; naturally, he cannot give the ideology of revolution. He will give ideologies that prevent any dream of revolution, of change. Of course the king, the warriors, cannot be in favor of revolution because it is going to be against them. They will be thrown out of their thrones. The businessmen cannot be for revolution, either, because all revolutions are against the rich.
And the poor man cannot even imagine revolution, because he has not been allowed any kind of education. He has been prohibited from any contact with the society of the three higher classes. He lives outside the town: he cannot live inside the town. The poor people’s wells are not deep, they cannot put much money into making wells. The businessmen have big, deep wells and the king has his own; but even in times when rains have not come and his wells are dry, the sudra is not allowed to take water from any other well. He may have to go ten miles to fetch water from a river.
He is so hungry that it is difficult to manage one meal a day, which has no nourishment in it – how can he think of revolution? He knows that this is his fate. He has been told and conditioned by the priest that this is his fate: “God has given you an opportunity to show your trust. This poverty is nothing, it is a question of a few years. If you can remain faithful, great is the reward.” So on the one hand the priest goes on preaching to them against any change, and on the other hand they cannot conceive of change because they are undernourished.
And you have to understand one thing: that the undernourished person loses intelligence. Intelligence blossoms only when you have everything that your body needs, plus something more. That plus becomes your intelligence, because intelligence is a luxury. A person who has only one meal a day has nothing, no energy left for intelligence to grow. It is the intelligentsia that creates the ideas, new philosophies, new ways of life, new dreams for the future; but that intelligentsia is already on the top. In fact, India has done something of tremendous importance: no other country has been able to maintain the status quo in such a scientific way. And you will be surprised; the man who did it was Manu. After five thousand years, his sutras are still followed exactly.
In this century, only two persons outside India have appreciated Manu. One is Friedrich Nietzsche, the other is Adolf Hitler. Adolf Hitler was a disciple of Friedrich Nietzsche. Friedrich Nietzsche was the philosopher of Nazism: Adolf Hitler was simply practicing what Nietzsche had preached. The relationship is exactly as between Marx and Lenin. Marx was the philosopher who gave the whole ideology of communism, and Lenin put it into reality. The same was the relationship between Friedrich Nietzsche and Adolf Hitler.
It is not a coincidence that they should both appreciate a book written five thousand years before in India. Both appreciated it because they could see what a grand master-planner Manu must have been, to have made a system that is still alive. He prevented revolution for five thousand years, and perhaps he will prevent it forever. There may never be a revolution in India.
The Communist Party is one of the oldest parties in India, but it has no power, because to the Indian mind it has no appeal. The brahmin is not going to listen, because the communists don’t believe in God; they are irreligious people, immoral people. The warriors are not going to listen because they have power of their own; anybody who has power is not going to listen to the communists because they want to distribute power and everything equally. Now, if you have power you would not like it to be distributed equally. The only joy in having power is that you are on the top and everybody else is below you, that you have succeeded in reaching the top of Everest and others are far below. You cannot accept the idea of distribution of power.
The businessman cannot be for communists, because his money will be distributed equally. And the man who could have been interested in communism, the fourth class, is so unintelligent, is so much in the grip of the priest, that you cannot convince a poor man in India that he is poor because he has been exploited. I have tried, it is impossible. He will go on saying, “No. It is my fate, my karma, and please don’t say anything which disturbs me, because then I will have to suffer for it. It is only a question of a few years. If I can keep faith in God and in the priests and in the scriptures, I will be freed and I will have all the enjoyment.”
He cannot make a revolution because revolution may destroy his paradise. Revolution is not appealing to him because it needs a certain intelligence. For centuries he and his forefathers have been only making shoes. They have never done anything else. They are not allowed to do anything else; the system is so strict that no movement is possible. A shoemaker’s son, whatsoever he wants, cannot move into another profession. He will not be accepted anywhere.
The politicians and priests are ambitious for power. There is another ambition – the ambition for money, because that is also a power. So there are three power lines. One is that of the priest – that he has a direct relationship with God; that he knows and you don’t know; that he is wise and you are ignorant; that he is virtuous, and that is why he is born a brahmin – and you have committed sins in the past, that’s why you are not in the first class. Everybody according to his actions.
The second line of power is the political power, which in the past in India – and everywhere else, too – was the power of the sword. And third is the power of money.
These are the only three powers. And these three kinds of people, rather than fighting with each other, have divided their areas, which is simply intelligent. They have divided their areas and they don’t interfere in each other’s area. The great mass which is exploited by all the three in different ways remains enslaved: goes on working for others, lives poor, dies poor, never knows anything of beauty, of music, of poetry. These things are not for the poor masses.
My effort is to make it absolutely clear to the intelligent people of the world that these three are criminals. Anybody who has a will to power is a criminal. That is my definition of a criminal: will to power. And why do I say the will to power is criminal? Because will to power simply means power over others. The others have to be enslaved and exploited. The others have to be reduced into subhuman species. The others had the same potential but they are not allowed to actualize their potential.
Will to power means that you want to become the master and reduce others into slaves. This can be done in three ways. One is through knowledge, which the priest has. After the British Raj in India there was a great struggle, because the brahmins were not ready for their scriptures to be translated into any other language. They had to remain in ancient Sanskrit – which has never been a language of the people; it was the language only of the priests. But the country was under British rule and there was no way for the priests although they tried hard, saying that their scriptures should not be translated, that they would be destroyed. But Britain was intent – this was the oldest civilization; there may be secrets in their tremendous number of scriptures – so they started translating them.
Those translations of Sanskrit literature destroyed the whole wisdom of the brahmins, because before nobody had ever understood what they were saying. Sanskrit is a beautiful language, almost poetry. It has a magical quality to it. You can sing it, and even the prose sounds like poetry. So brahmins were singing it, chanting it, and nobody knew the meaning. Whatever the priest wants is the meaning.
Sanskrit is the language of God, and only the priests understand the language. So whatever transpires between God and man has to come through the priest, the brahmin. The same was the situation in other places. Rabbis never wanted their scriptures to be translated from Hebrew into the ordinary people’s language.
It is the same with every religion, and the reason is that those scriptures are simply nonsense – there is nothing in them. You dig the whole mountain, and you don’t find even a rat! The knowledge was bogus, pretended, and the pretense could be carried for centuries only if the masses were prevented.
You will be surprised to know that one of the Hindu gods, Rama, an incarnation of God, poured burning melted lead into a poor man’s ears, because the man heard the chanting of the Vedas while hiding behind the trees where a brahmin ritual was happening. There is no question of education; even hearing was not allowed, and this was the punishment. And Rama is worshipped as an incarnation of God.
Gandhi prayed continuously to Rama. I am simply amazed that a man like Gandhi, who talked continuously of non-violence, was a worshipper of Rama, who is always carrying a bow and arrows – those are his symbols – the man who was so cruel.
I don’t think that poor man was doing anything wrong. He was hiding behind the trees and listening, just out of curiosity about what happens in religious ceremonies. And of course there was nothing wrong in it; he could not understand what was happening. But because he did something against the social structure, Rama made that man deaf for his whole life.
But still Gandhi went on chanting the name of Rama every morning and evening. It was his last word when he was assassinated: “Hey Rama. Oh Rama!” His last word was addressed to that man who was not non-violent – who was not even human, there is no question of his being divine.
This is something that the movement of sannyas has to do: to expose that these three groups, lusty for power, have been conspiring against the whole of humanity. It is time that we should understand, and destroy their contract. And it can be easily done. You just have to create more and more communes where there is no lust for power, where we are not against money, we are not against clothes, we are not against anything; where we want our sannyasins to live luxuriously, comfortably – nobody is to exploit their labor and nobody is to dominate them – and where the plumber is as respected as the professor, there is no distinction at all.
I am surprised that people who come to visit the commune cannot see the simple fact that a plumber is as respected as a professor. In fact, nobody knows who is a plumber and who is a professor, because one day the professor is a professor and another he is a plumber. And our plumbers are not uneducated, either: they can be professors any time.
This is for the first time that so many people are living with human dignity, and without any effort to make them equal – because that effort is aggression. That is where I differ from communism. My difference is totally different from other people’s differences: they are against communism because their vested interests will be destroyed by communism; I am against communism because it is not communist enough. It is far behind.
This can be easily experienced. In Russia, you can see that people’s individuality has been completely destroyed. Rather than giving them freedom they are completely enslaved; and the classes have not disappeared – just their names have changed. Now there are the people who are in power, the power elite, and the people who have no power. Russia has two classes, and movement between those two classes is as difficult as it is in India.
For sixty or seventy years after the revolution, almost the same group has remained in power. People went on dying, new people went on taking their places, but those new people were not from the masses. For example when Stalin died, Khrushchev had been waiting just behind him for all those forty years, knowing that the moment Stalin died he would become the most powerful man in the world. Of course, he hated Stalin, but even to utter a single word against him… Everybody knew that Stalin simply killed all competitors.
In the revolution there were many leaders; the most important was Lenin. Stalin poisoned him, but the poisoning was done so slowly that it took two years for him to die. He was sick for those two years, and Stalin functioned on his behalf. And in those two years he managed to put his own people in all the strategic positions – because once Lenin died then his second man, Trotsky, would take over. That’s why Lenin was kept alive; otherwise there was no need to give him small doses, just one dose would have been enough. He was kept alive so that Trotsky could not come into power. And Stalin was only a secretary; he functioned on behalf of Lenin. He saw the moment: that it was time – that he had changed all the strategic people and Lenin was finished. And Trotsky did not have any hope of staying alive. Seeing the situation, he escaped from Russia.
And he did well to escape, because Stalin was such a revengeful man that he even killed his dog. And finally he killed Trotsky also, in Mexico. He had escaped as far away as possible, but a professional killer was sent and he was killed. The other people in line were Kamenev and Zinovyev; everybody was killed, imprisoned, sent to Siberia and nobody ever heard what happened to those people.
Trotsky was the most important person, but he was so sure of his importance that he never bothered about what was happening behind his back. Because he had done all this, Stalin was perfectly aware that the same thing could be done to him that he had done to Lenin, to Trotsky, to Kamenev, to Zinovyev – to all the people who were important, more important than him. Stalin put in his own people, and the distance between him and those people was great. He always kept the distance the same; nobody could think that he was a friend. Friends are dangerous in power politics, because they are too intimate, too close, and dangerous.

Khrushchev was a worshipper of Stalin. The day Stalin died and Khrushchev became the prime minister, in his cabinet he exposed his mind for the first time. He said, “For forty years I have been burning. I have seen Stalin do things which nobody has ever done in the whole of history.” He had killed almost ten million people after the revolution.
Somebody from the back asked, “If this was the case and that man was a murderer, what were you doing? Why did you not say it before?”
Khrushchev laughed and said, “Comrade, just stand up so that I can see your face, and please tell me what is your name.”
Nobody stood. He asked twice, and then he said, “Do you now understand why I was silent? Have you got my answer? If you had stood up, you would have known what would have happened to me if I had spoken a single word against Stalin.” But the same did happen to him.

There is a company of power elites who have been running the whole show, and they have all the power. They have the power of the priest because they have completely destroyed religion; there is no question of anybody being a priest. They have taken that role also. Every book is published only by the government. Every newspaper, every magazine, any information that is published is published by the government. The government is doing now what the priests had been doing before. The politician has taken over the area of the priest completely; now he is doubly powerful. He decides what is right and what is wrong, and he has taken the third power also in his hands, because everything is nationalized.
And what does it actually mean? When things are nationalized, everything goes into the hands of the politicians: all the factories, all the fields, all the money, everything – people included, because people are no longer people, they are commodities. So in Russia something very special has happened: for the first time all three have become one. That’s why Russia – the whole country – has become a great prison, a great concentration camp.
We have to create communes around the world as models, where people can come and see that power is not a need at all, that you can rejoice without being powerful, that you need not enslave anybody.
What you try to do by enslaving somebody can be done more easily just by being friendly, just by being more loving. There is no need to make somebody higher and somebody lower. Everybody who is contributing to the commune in any way – cleaning the toilets – is as significant as being the vice-chancellor of the university, because both are doing something essential. In fact, the vice-chancellor can go on leave and there will be no trouble, but the toilet cleaner cannot go on leave; he is more essential, more fundamentally needed. He should be given more respect, too.
But nobody feels any inferiority, any superiority. Nobody bothers about it. The day’s work is over and everybody is enjoying dancing, singing. Professors are there, therapists are there, cleaners are there. There is no class.
To me this is true communism. We have not imposed any equality; everybody is unique, nobody is equal here. Yet there is a subtle current of equality which does not make you similar. It leaves you unique, and yet all inequality disappears. Here, nobody is a priest, or everybody is a priest. Here nobody is for power, or everybody has power. There is no problem. If somebody wants to hang a sign around his neck, “I am the president of this universe,” nobody is going to object. People will really enjoy.
Nobody is going to say to him, “This is not possible, you don’t belong. You are claiming to be the lord of the whole universe, and you just clean the toilets.” Nobody is going to say that. He can go in the toilets, go on cleaning them with his sign board hanging around his neck – still there is no contradiction. People will take it as a joke. Anybody pretending to be powerful will be taken as a joke, an entertainment, that this man has gone a little crazy.
Okay?
Osho,
You have called yourself a lazy man, but you frequently speak for nearly three hours in the morning, and then give a press conference at night. Are you lazy, or effortless? Is there a difference?
I am really lazy. And to me, speaking is not an action. I can go on speaking twenty-four hours; just there is only one trouble – my bladder! I don’t stop because I have answered you, I have to stop because the bladder says, “Enough – just move, otherwise I am going to move.”
But basically I am absolutely lazy. And to me speaking is just like birds singing, flowers blossoming. Yes, you can call it “effortless effort” but that is giving a very beautiful name to a simple thing. I would rather prefer just to be called lazy.
Okay, any more?
Osho,
Why don't journalists ask direct questions? They try to trap you and you seem to escape easily.
They cannot trap me, for the simple reason that I don’t care about contradicting myself. That is their trouble. You can trap a man easily if he tries to remain consistent. Then you can say, “Ten years ago, you said this.” In ten years, everything has changed. Either the man has to accept that he was wrong then – which goes against his ego – or he can say that he is wrong now. That goes even more against his ego and he is trapped.
I am not trapped for the simple reason that I say whatever I am saying right now. Only for that am I responsible. What I will say the next moment has nothing to do with this moment’s statement.
I believe in change because the whole of existence is changing. You cannot say to a rosebush, “This is not right. Yesterday there were no flowers and today, suddenly… Were you wrong yesterday, or are you wrong today?” No, we accept it. Life is changing; it is a flux, a movement.
But in human society – in all the cultures – consistency has been praised, appreciated, made respectable. And only an idiot can remain consistent. The more intelligent you are, the less is the possibility of remaining consistent, because you will see the change. And with the changing life and the changing universe, how can you go on clinging to something which is no longer applicable?
But people want respectability; they are trapped. I am very clear that I don’t care about respectability. You can go and call me self-contradictory, and I accept it as a compliment – because to me, only intelligence can be self-contradictory: the greater the intelligence, the more contradictions.
Society insisted for consistency, and gave respect to it, because it kept people retarded. They could not change. It went against their egos, so even though they could see that something had changed, they would not accept it, they would go on repeating the old. And society would respect those people as reliable, responsible: “You can trust them, you can trust their word; if they give you their word, they will keep it.” The man of his word has been respected for centuries.
I am not a man of my word. I am at ease with existence, and I don’t care about these idiots – and their respectability, and their rewards, and awards. I don’t care at all. I have a totally different approach. I am in tune with existence, and I am perfectly happy with it. If existence changes its tune, I change my tune. I keep step with existence, not with the culture, not with society, not even with my own past.
The past is dead. I am only alive here and now. That’s why they are in trouble. They can trap politicians very easily, “You have said this, and now you are doing just the opposite.” Nobody can say that to me because I never promised that I would be saying the same thing tomorrow. I never promised that I would not go against my word. I have never given any word to anybody. I am absolutely free to be myself – that is the trouble.
One thing – that they cannot trap me. Secondly, because they cannot trap me they start feeling nervous, because they don’t know, “What to do now?” They have never come face to face with such a man – who does not care for respectability, who does not care for honoring his own word, who does not care for all the rules that the societies have made. I live according to my own rules.

When I was a student in the university, just beside my room some students were very interested in playing cards. And once in a while they needed a partner. There were three, they wanted one more, and I was just easily available. But they were afraid to approach me.
One day one of them knocked, and he said, “We know that you are not interested in anything we are interested in. You don’t go to the movies, you don’t go to the matches, you don’t want to meet people and share gossip about professors, who is flirting with who’s wife. You are different we know, but we are in trouble. We want to play but one partner is missing.”
I said, “I can come but the game will be according to my rules. I don’t follow anybody’s rules – why I should follow?”
They said, “That is difficult. The rules are fixed. A particular game has its rules.”
I said, “It may have, but who decided it? I am ready to come.”
They said, “Wait, we will have to think about it.”
They never came back. Once in a while, I used to walk in front of their room and I would ask, “Do you need a partner?”
“We don’t want any partner because we cannot understand you. And if you make the rules, you are going to win because we will not know what to do. We know the old rules and we play the game according to them, but if you make the rules, you are going to win.”
I said, “That’s clear. Whoever makes the rules, wins. That’s why I never accept anybody’s rules. I make my own rules.”

That is the trouble with the poor journalists! They have a certain game which they go on playing with politicians and priests. And they can easily trap the president, the pope, or anybody. There is no problem in it, but they cannot trap me. I simply don’t play the game with the same accepted rules.
I have my own rules, and they cannot even learn my rules because I go on changing. So, it is not that a journalist, encountering me a few times, will be able to trap me. Impossible. Each time he comes he will find another man. And he will come prepared for the old man, who exists no longer.
Okay?

============================================================

John McCarthy,
Lewiston Tribune, Idaho, United States
Osho,
I'm pleased to be able to have a chance to talk with you.
I have a bunch of questions and maybe we won't get to all of them. But some of them I'd like to try and get short, simple answers.
Okay, just start.
Osho,
Are you pleased with the place your followers have created here? Is it the kind of home you wished to have when you came to America?
I never think of the future. I never think of the next moment, hence nothing can disappoint me. Whatever happens is perfectly good. The problem of disappointment arises only if you have a certain expectation. I have never expected anything in my life. So, whatsoever has happened, I am thankful to existence. Everything is as it should be.
Do you wish that the politics in Oregon would be different, in the treatment of you and your followers?
I don’t wish anything, I simply live my life. If that changes somebody, it is his problem. If it changes the politics of Oregon, that is the Oregonian’s problem. I am not trying to change anything. I’m not interested in interfering in other people’s lives; neither do I want that they should interfere in my life. To me the individual, individuality, is the highest value. I respect the individual. I don’t want to be interfered with, nor am I interested in interfering in anybody’s life. And that’s what politics is – continuously interfering into everybody’s life.
I am not a politician; my people have nothing to do with politics. In fact they have gathered around me to live their lives as joyously and peacefully as possible. They have not gathered around me to create a revolution in the world, change the world, make it a classless society or this and that. We are not interested in all that garbage at all. Tomorrow is always uncertain; even the next moment has no guarantee. We have only this moment to live.
The politician is a fool. He is destroying his life and he is destroying other people’s lives. Everybody should live his life, should sing his song and let everybody else be himself. That will be a really human world. So I do not wish to do anything; I simply live, and my people want to live with me. They love me, they rejoice with me. For them, I am their whole world; for me, they are my whole world. Beyond the red clothes, nothing exists.
Osho,
I don't know a whole lot about Rajneeshism as a religion. Can you explain to me whether you consider yourself to be God, a prophet, a wise man, a teacher? How do you think of yourself or your followers?
I am not a God – I am not that stupid. Only a stupid God can create this world, this mess, this madhouse. Certainly I am not that idiotic. And I don’t think God can be idiotic, so the only answer will be that there is no God. That’s why this world is in a mess. It is enough proof that there is no God. There is nobody creating, controlling, maintaining; it is all accidental. In a way it is good, because in this accidentalness of existence there is freedom. In fact, the very idea of God creating us is ugly. Then we are puppets; only puppets are created.
To me, existence has always been here. It has no beginning, no end. It is a tremendous explosion of energy in all dimensions. But everything is accidental, nothing is planned. Planning is not the way of existence.
So I am certainly not God. And without God there is no possibility of any prophet, any messiah. God is a basic necessity for a prophet to exist. Moses will be nobody if he does not create the illusion that he has encountered God, and God has given him the Ten Commandments; nobody will listen to his Ten Commandments. But he is using the authority of God, for which no evidence exists – because those Ten Commandments are so simple, ordinary, that any human person of average intelligence can make them. There is nothing special in them, nothing unique, nothing that can prove that they are coming from a divine source.
But to be a prophet you need a God, to be a messiah you need a God. God is an absolute necessity for all those mad people who want to project their egos; without the backdrop of God it cannot be done. So they all insist, “Believe in God.” Once you believe in God, then naturally you have to believe in the messenger of God, in the messiah of God, in the only begotten son of God. Those are logical corollaries.
The moment that I deny there is a God, I have denied all possibility of there being a prophet, a messiah, a messenger. All that is finished. I am simply a human being, just as you are. I don’t have any pretensions of being higher than anybody. Certainly I am different from you, but not higher, not lower – different only in the sense that you are fast asleep and I am awake. But that is not much of a difference. Just a little cold water has to be thrown into your eyes, and you will be awake.
And that’s what I am doing with my people: throwing so much ice-cold water in their eyes.
How can I get cold water thrown in my face? How do I go about it?
I’m already doing it. And you know it. Just don’t start shivering, because the temperature is three degrees centigrade in this room. In fact, there is no need to throw ice-cold water: you are sitting in an ice-cold atmosphere where one has to become awake.
How do you know at a glance, without me speaking but a few phrases and introducing myself, that I'm asleep?
Only one who is awake can know who is asleep. The person who is asleep cannot know who is asleep and who is awake. I am awake, that’s why I know you are asleep. You cannot know – perhaps I may be talking in your sleep, perhaps you may be dreaming. You cannot be certain about me, but I am absolutely certain about you. Your eyes are open but you are asleep. You are trying hard to wake up a little, and look through your glasses and find out who is awake and who is asleep – and that’s a good sign. That means you will have to come here again and again, till finally you are awake.
The moment one awakes, one is simply shocked, seeing that the whole world is asleep. And in sleep, people are walking, talking, going to the church, to the synagogue; in sleep, writing books, making films – doing all kinds of businesses, but their spiritual sleep continues.
When I say spiritual sleep my meaning is that you don’t know who you are. You may know everything around you, but just one thing you are not aware of – your own center, your own being. The moment you know yourself, you are awake. So I am using awakening and sleep as metaphors.
Osho,
What does a man or a woman experience by following your religion? Do they become awake?
There is no promise. I never promise anything to anybody. I am here, available; I am ready to explain how one becomes awake – and my work is finished there. Then it is up to you. If you fail, I will not be disappointed. If you succeed, you succeed. I don’t take the credit for it. So the success is yours, the failure is yours. My only work is to give you a clear-cut idea how you can become more conscious – I call it meditation – working, walking, sitting.
I don’t believe in what others call meditation – that for ten or twenty minutes you do it, and then just be your ordinary self for twenty-four hours, then again meditate for twenty minutes. This is stupid. It is like saying to a person, “Every morning breathe for twenty minutes and then forget all about it, because you have to do many other things. Then the next morning you can breathe for twenty minutes again.”
To me, meditation is exactly like breathing. So, whatsoever you are doing and wherever you are, do it more consciously. For example, I can raise this hand without any consciousness, just unconsciously, out of habit…

I have heard about two Jews walking by the ocean. It was a cold morning and one Jew was keeping his hands in his pockets. It was really cold. And the other was continuously talking, and saying this and that. And he was puzzled that the other man was saying only, yes, no, but did not participate in the conversation. This is not Jewish.
Finally he asked, “What has happened to you? Have you changed your religion?”
The other said, “You can say whatever you want to say, but I am not going to take my hands out of the pockets.”
But the first said, “What has that to do with it?”
The other said, “A Jew cannot talk without his hands. I am not going to talk; it is too cold to take my hands out!”

But you can also raise your hand with full awareness, and you can see the difference between the two. The act is the same: one is mechanical, the other is full of consciousness, and the quality is tremendously different.
Try it, because it is a question of taste and experience. Walking, just try for a few minutes to walk consciously. With each step be alert, and you will be surprised that the quality of your walk is totally different, it is relaxed. There is no tension, and there is a subtle joy that is arising out of your relaxed walking. And the more you become aware of this joy, the more you would like to be awake. Eating, eat with awareness. People are simply throwing food into their mouths, not even chewing it, just swallowing it.
Thirty million people in America are suffering from overeating. A strange world we are living in: one thousand people are dying every day in Ethiopia because they don’t have food; thirty million people are dying in America because they have too much food. These people are suffering from obesity, fatness, cannot resist eating more and more. No doctor is going to help them – unless they become aware while they are eating, if they become aware… A few things happen as a by-product of awareness. Their eating will be slowed down; they will start chewing – because unless you chew your food you are putting an unnecessary burden on your whole system. Your stomach has no teeth. One has to chew each bite exactly forty-two times, then anything that you are eating becomes liquid.
A man of awareness only drinks, because before he swallows he has changed the solid food into liquid. And the strange thing is that when you chew forty-two times, you enjoy the taste so much. One bite of an unconscious man gives forty-two times more taste to the conscious man. It is simple arithmetic: the unconscious man will have to eat forty-two bites just to have the same taste. Then he becomes fat and still unsatisfied, and still he feels to eat more. The man of awareness eats only as much as his body needs. He immediately feels, “Now there is no need, the hunger is gone.” He is content doing anything.
So my meditation is a totally different kind of approach. It has to be spread over the twenty-four hours of each day. Even falling asleep, remain alert to how sleep is descending on you, so slowly, so silently, but you can hear the steps. The darkness is growing, you are relaxing – you can feel the muscles, the body, the tense parts which are preventing sleep – and soon you will see the whole body has relaxed and sleep has come. But slowly, slowly a great revolution happens. Sleep comes to you, but something deep inside you goes on remaining awake, even in sleep.
So the situation is that you are asleep even when you think you are awake, and I am awake even when you think I’m asleep. And unless a man becomes aware in his sleep he is not aware, not awake. That is the criterion.
And there are so many by-products by which you can judge. Dreams disappear because dreams need you to be completely unconscious. They come from the unconscious mind, but if you are conscious they cannot come. Sigmund Freud would have been immensely enriched if he had come to a man like me, who has no dreams. He would have been puzzled also – and he would have had to change his whole idea of psychoanalysis. But he only came across people who were asleep. He himself was asleep – he had no idea of any spiritual awakening. Otherwise, he would certainly have realized that there is a space where man is conscious, just conscious, and there are no dreams at all.
If dreams disappear in the night, the second thing will happen to you: thoughts will disappear in the daytime. That does not mean you will become incapable of thinking, it simply means you will not just go on thinking mechanically, unnecessarily. You will be capable of thinking if you want to think, otherwise you will be silent. And a man who can remain silent for hours is gathering energy – so whenever he wants to think, his thinking has some strength, some power, some tremendous energy. Ordinary people’s thinking is just impotent; their thoughts are just vagrant, clouds floating in their minds.
A man of meditation will find that dreams disappear, and then the sleep is of incomparable beauty. Then sleep becomes spiritual. To transform sleep into spirituality is religion. Then your whole day becomes a day of silence. You will talk, but something deep down in you will remain a silent witness. So you will not say things which will unnecessarily create trouble for you and trouble for others. You will say only that which is absolutely needed. You will only say the truth, otherwise you will be able to say, “I do not know.”
You will not believe in anything. Either you will know it or you will not know it. Belief is a deception – you don’t know, yet you pretend as if you know. All these people in temples, in churches, in synagogues, what are they doing? To whom are they praying? They don’t know God. Their priest does not know God. They don’t know that any prayer has ever been heard by anybody. They don’t know that any prayer has ever been answered by anybody. Still they are praying to a God.

There is a beautiful story by Leo Tolstoy: Three uneducated, illiterate villagers, who used to live on a small island in a river, became famous all over the country as great saints. Now, this was too much for the archbishop, because in Christianity you can be a saint only if the church certifies you to be a saint. In fact, the word saint comes from sanction. If the church sanctions you – certifies you – you are a saint. And without the archbishop signing, who has made these fools saints?
Their fame was far and wide; people even started coming from outside the country. Finally he decided to go and put these people right. He got into a boat and reached the small island. They were sitting under a beautiful tree, all three looking so happy. They were sitting naked, they had not even clothes. The archbishop went close to them.
All three touched his feet and said, “Why did you trouble yourself? You could have sent a message and we ourselves would have come to the church.”
Now the archbishop felt confident. Up to now he had been feeling a little nervous: three saints and he himself knows nothing, except that he has reached the top in a religious-political hierarchy. But now he was confident, and he asked the three people, “What is your religion?”
They said, “We don’t know. Religion? Are there many religions?”
Those simple fellows are asking a significant question. Only simple people can ask significant questions like, “Are there many religions?”
They said, “We thought there is only one kind of religiousness. But you can teach us – if you feel just being religious is not enough, you can teach us. We are available. We are illiterate, ignorant people, so please don’t feel offended by our answers.”
The archbishop asked, “Okay, whatever your religion, what is your prayer? Certainly you must be Christian” – because in Russia at that time, there was no other religion – “you must be Christian. What is your prayer?”
They all looked at each other and they said, “You say it.”
The second said to the third, “You say it.”
And the third said to the first two, “Please, better you say it!”
The archbishop was getting angry: “What is this nonsense? You cannot say your prayer?”
They said, “The reality is, we don’t know how to pray and we don’t know what prayer is, but we have invented our own prayer. Hearing that God is a trinity and we are also a trinity, so we have made a simple prayer for ourselves. Please don’t feel offended. We pray whenever the moment makes us feel like praying. In the early morning sun, when it is so beautiful on the lake and the whole lake becomes gold, we feel like thanking existence. Our prayer is, ‘You are three, we are three, please have mercy on us.’ This is our prayer.”
The archbishop said, “This is absolute nonsense. ‘You are three, we are three, have mercy on us.’ Who has ever heard of such a prayer?”
Those poor people said, “We are ready to learn.” So he gave them the official prayer. But it was a long prayer, so by the time he ended it they said, “This is very difficult, because we have forgotten the beginning by the time you came to the end. You will have to repeat it. Please repeat it so we can remember the beginning.”
He repeated it – just the beginning – but they said, “Please go on, because now we have forgotten the end.”
Three times he repeated it, so that they could grasp the prayer. They thanked the archbishop. He was very happy that he had put them right and now he could tell people, “Those are idiots, and you were thinking of them as saints.”
He went back into his boat, and just in the middle of the river he saw something unimaginable. Those three, naked, idiots were coming, running on the water! He could not believe his eyes. He had never even believed that Jesus had walked on water; he knew deep down that this was all nonsense. He had never told anybody, and as far as his sermons were concerned, he was trying to prove that Jesus could do anything.
But those idiots were walking on water, running on water, and they caught hold of the boat and said, “Just a moment please. We have forgotten the prayer. Will you teach us again?”
But this was enough for the archbishop. He touched the feet of those three idiots and said, “Your prayer is right, mine was wrong. Just go and say your prayer. I unnecessarily interfered in your life; just forgive me. Seeing you walking on the water, in fact, for the first time I have become a Christian. I had never believed that Jesus really walked on water.”

Religion is a very simple phenomenon. Theology has nothing to with religion; it makes things unnecessarily complex. Religion is a simple awareness of whatever you are doing, wherever you are. And when this awareness surrounds you always, like a luminous aura, you become aware for the first time of the universe – its beauties, its music, its eternal song. To me that is the religious experience. In religious experience you don’t encounter a God. There is nobody there, just this pure existence. But it is all alive – these flowers, these birds on the wing, these stars – everything is alive, but because you are asleep you cannot experience the aliveness that surrounds you.
And we are not islands. No man is an island. We are part of this whole living, infinite continent. Those flowers are part of us, just as we are part of them. Those faraway stars are within us, as we are within the universe. That experience of unity, of at-one-ment, is liberation.
So my teaching is very simple. Meditation is the key, becoming totally aware is the result. Experiencing oneness with the whole is the reward.
“You are three, we are three, have mercy on us.”
This is my trinity: meditation, awareness, oneness.
Osho,
Do you think there are many people in the world who need that message or want that message, and who will come here to Rajneeshpuram? And because of that, will Rajneeshpuram grow?
Everybody needs that message. Everybody has a birthright to experience existence, its ecstasy. But your question has many questions in it. The first part: I say everybody needs it. The second part of what you are asking, “Will all of them come to Rajneeshpuram?” no, only very few will come – because although everybody needs it, to know that you need it a certain intelligence is needed, a certain youthfulness is needed, a certain daring, courage, adventurousness is needed, which is missing.
So only a very few people will arrive here, although it is everybody’s need. But I have my communes all over the world; I have my people in almost every country. There are nearabout one million sannyasins all around the earth. In every language, in every country, even in places where it is almost impossible, I have my people – even in Soviet Russia.
Just the other day I received a Soviet communist magazine written against me. Everything was just rubbish and false. But I was happy; it shows that the communists and the government are now getting frightened, the same way as they are getting frightened here in Oregon. And in Russia I don’t have many sannyasins, but enough. In fact, I have even taken the monopoly of the red color from the communists! My people are underground, they meet in basements. They cannot publish my books: they write by hand, or type, or send messages, so that it can reach other people. Whatsoever books they have been able to smuggle in are mostly caught by the government. The KGB is against them, and many of my sannyasins have been persecuted, although they cannot prove that they are sannyasins. But still, in Russia just suspicion is enough. There is no need for any proof.
They have published the names of twenty people in the newspaper: “These seem to be his contacts in the Soviet Union, beware of them.” That is enough for those people to be persecuted by the police, by the people. They may lose their jobs, they may lose their facilities, they may be sent to Siberia. But you will be surprised that they are more excited about me and my work than anywhere else – because for sixty years Russia has forgotten what youthfulness means. It has forgotten that being a revolutionary is a part of being young. Now you cannot be revolutionary in Russia.
Osho,
Will your religion become a major religion in the world, in terms of numbers?
No, it will never, because we don’t convert anybody. Conversion is insulting the other person, his intelligence, his integrity. When you convert a person you are saying, “You are wrong and I am right. You don’t know, I know, so just follow me.” No, I cannot allow my people to say that to anybody. My people just have to live their lives, and if somebody becomes interested on his own, he is welcome.
But we are not missionaries, so naturally our numbers cannot grow. And we don’t believe in the politics of numbers; that is a political game. But anybody who has a desire to explore into the reality of his own being is bound to move toward me, sooner or later. But the well remains in its own place; the thirsty come to it. The well does not go and propagate, “Come to me, because only I have the right kind of water. Don’t go to other wells.” Where they want to go is their problem. They will not be prevented from drinking the wine that I am offering here; they will be our respected guests.
But I cannot humiliate anybody by saying to him that we have the only true message; that I am the only begotten son of God; that I am the only prophet of God; that the holy Koran is the last message; that you need not think of anything else, just read the Bible, everything is there; that the Vedas contain all knowledge, it is enough, more than that is dangerous – that’s what Hindus say.
I don’t belong to these people and their company. I am a totally different person. I respect everybody. If somebody chooses to be wrong, it is his freedom. It may be wrong according to me, but if to him it looks to be right, let him go on his way. If it is right, good; he is blessed. If he is wrong, sooner or later he will have to come back.
Osho,
Why are you now giving interviews to people like myself?
I enjoy talking.
Why speak to a person like myself, who is not a believer in what many other people would like to hear from you?
Just because you can send the message to many people. I am going to talk to every journalist around the world. I’m going to use every media, just to announce to people that if they are thirsty, we have the right drink for them. If they want to come, they are welcome. It is not to convert them, it is just to invite them. Truth only invites, truth never converts. But the invitation is enough.
Why now? Why not two months ago, a year ago?
I am a man of absolute spontaneity. When I feel to be silent, then nobody can force me to speak. When I want to speak, nobody can stop me from speaking. Whatever I want to say, I never make any compromise. Whether it is going to be liked, disliked, respected, disrespected; these are not my considerations at all. I felt to be silent. For three and half years I enjoyed silence. Then suddenly one day I felt the time had come to sing the song again, so I started speaking. But I cannot promise for tomorrow. I may be silent again.
I am just a little crazy. I just go according to my whims, and the people who have to live with me have to live with my whims.
Osho,
Where do you live and what do you do?
I don’t do anything. I am not a doer.
How do you spend your time? How does the day pass for you?
It passes so fast, but I enjoy it immensely. I must sleep about ten hours every day – eight hours in the night, two or three hours in the day – because to me, sleep is meditation. For three hours I enjoy my bathroom – one and a half hours in the morning, one and a half in the evening.
I have loved water from my very childhood, because it is my understanding that life has arisen out of water. And now scientists are thinking on the same lines, that life must have arisen in water. Every child in the mother’s womb repeats the whole cycle of evolution. First he looks like a fish; only later on does he start looking like a monkey. And between these two he passes through almost all the phases that man has passed through. In his last stage he even has a tail that falls off before his birth, and everybody still has the place where the tail was attached. Those bones show that there was something attached to them, which is missing.
But the beginning is as a fish, and for nine months the child lives continuously in sea water. In the mother’s womb, the water in which the child floats has exactly the same components as the water in the sea. That’s why when a woman is pregnant she starts eating more salt, starts enjoying more salty things – because that water needs more salt, that baby needs more salt. She is unaware of why she is doing it, but the child needs it exactly like sea water.
So, I have enjoyed water from my very childhood. My birthplace had a beautiful river. I don’t think of anybody in that place, but once in a while, lying in my tub or in my swimming pool, I remember that beautiful river. That’s the only thing that I remember of my birthplace – no teacher, no family, no friends. My only friend, my only teacher, my only school was that river. And it has taught me immensely. Just to create the illusion, I have a swimming pool here of Olympic size.
I have beautiful bathrooms. Nothing else matters to me much, but my sannyasins have made me two beautiful bathrooms – two, because any moment if something goes wrong with one bathroom, then I am not going to miss my bath. And they have made my bathrooms with such love that they look like temples, with beautiful Jacuzzis – with hot water, normal cold water, ice-cold water. And I enjoy. That to me is meditation. In every act, my meditation continues.
And then I talk for five hours every day – two and a half hours in the morning, two and a half hours in the evening. One and a half hours goes to my food, one hour I go driving. That I have always enjoyed. I have my own road; my people love me so immensely, I don’t think anybody has ever been so loved, and has been so blessed. I don’t know – I wonder why they love me, because I don’t have anything to offer them. But it is a miracle, and miracles happen. They have created a special road just for me. It is used only for one hour every day; twenty-three hours it has to rest – no traffic.
My people are so concerned about my life that they don’t want me to drive in traffic, because I am a terrific driver and I don’t believe in any rules – I may drive on the right, I may drive on the left, I may drive in the middle. So my poor people had to create a road just for me, so I can drive anywhere, any way, any speed I want.
And this is how my day passes. It passes so fast, but I live every moment of it very intensely.
Osho,
Why haven't your people who live here shown more love, and cooperated with their neighbors in Oregon more?
You have to ask them – and you have to ask the Oregonians. My people have not shown any hostility to anybody. My people are living in a place where the nearest neighbor is twenty miles away. We are so engrossed in our own life, who bothers about the Oregonians? Who has time for them? Nobody even talks about them. We don’t even know whether we are in Oregon or in Afghanistan! We are not interested in anything; they are just afraid. And that too, is simply animal psychology. Oregon must have the most primitive people in America, still much closer to animals than to man. Perhaps all the orangutans have come to Oregon!
Strange – we are such a small minority, and the governor keeps the army on alert: any moment they are ordered, within three hours they have to be able to reach Rajneeshpuram. I cannot believe that you can choose such idiots as governors. What has the army to do here? If they want their army to learn meditation, we can invite them. There is no need to keep them on alert – we can make them alert twenty-four hours a day! They should ask us. And they can go on sending one battalion after another, and we will destroy their whole army by making them alert – because an alert person cannot kill, only sleeping people can destroy.
We have no problem with the Oregonians – we have no contact even. We are so self-sufficient, we don’t need anything from them. We grow our food, we grow our vegetables, we have our milk products. We have everything that we need. Even if the whole of Oregon disappeared completely, we would not know about it unless somebody came and informed us. We are not interested at all.
And why should a majority be afraid of a small commune? They seem to be real cowards, impotent. Such a big majority – what can we do to them? But there is a reason why they are hostile; it shows something about their psychology. They cannot believe that people can be so happy, and they cannot tolerate the laughter, the love, the rejoicing of my people.
Jesus says in the Bible, “Blessed are those who mourn, because they shall be comforted, consoled in paradise.” I think Oregonians will have the first place. My people have no chance, they don’t mourn. They can even console God: “Please don’t cry, don’t weep, don’t feel guilty that you created the world. Forget it; whatsoever happened, happened. Don’t go on having nightmares that you created Adolf Hitler, Benito Mussolini, Josef Stalin, Genghis Khan, Tamerlane, Nadirshah – forget it all, it was a nightmare!”
If my people reach paradise, the first thing we have to do is to console God. And we have good people here, who do the best massage possible – a beauty clinic. They will all do whatsoever they can for poor God. But we don’t want to be consoled, there is no need.
This is the trouble: the basic trouble is that the rich man hates the super-rich and he is being hated by the poor. These unhappy people, miserable people all around – we are just like an island and they can hear the laughter in the valley.
For fifty years this place was dead. It was for sale, and nobody would purchase it because it is simply a desert. But when our people saw it, we took the challenge of the desert. It is not a small place – it is 126 square miles, almost an independent country. We have taken the challenge, and we are defeating the desert every day. The day I came here there was only one dilapidated house; now there are beautiful houses for five thousand sannyasins, all centrally air-conditioned. No religious community has ever lived in an air-conditioned commune, monastery – this is the first commune in the whole history of religion. They think in paradise there will be cool air; we don’t bother about it, we create cool air. We don’t want to be a burden on God, or on paradise – what we can do ourselves, why should we pray for it?
And we can do everything: we have our own hospital, we have our own school, we have our own legal experts, we have our own veterinary surgeons, we have our own university, our own psychologists. My people are not like Jesus’ twelve fools that he called his apostles. Any of my sannyasins would have defeated Jesus in discussion – an illiterate man, uneducated, a carpenter’s son – and that, too, is under suspicion. What does he know?
These people are all graduates from universities; they have doctorates and DLitts. Don’t be deceived if they are working on the farm – they have master’s degrees. And it is very easy: a man you will find today teaching in the university as a professor, you will find tomorrow working as a plumber. There is no problem, there is no hierarchy. The plumber and the professor are both needed, and my people are so educated that plumbers can teach in the university and professors can do the plumbing.
We are not concerned with Oregon at all. It is just one-sided hostility.
You speak of the independence of your community, its self-sufficiency, its ability to grow the food and take care of other needs. Is not the community run by electricity from an outside source?
We pay for it – we are not taking anything without paying. We pay for it and we have the right to have electricity on this land. This land is part of America; they cannot refuse. In fact, many of the businesses of the Oregonians have not gone bankrupt because of us. Many factories that make houses were on the verge of going bankrupt, but because we allowed them to make our houses, they survived.
We have been a help to Oregon. Every year thousands of sannyasins are coming here, spending money in Portland, in Madras, while reaching here. We have made a place for visitors from all around the world; we have helped the economy of Oregon. Otherwise, have you ever heard of anybody going to Oregon? People go to Egypt to look, people go to India, people go to Japan, people go to Nepal, deep in the Himalayas, people go to Switzerland. But this is the first time that people are coming to Oregon from every country. Such big economic, financial gain for Oregonians, and they are being simply stupid. They should help us. We can make it the biggest place for visitors, and they will all be benefited by it.
They should come and see – and they don’t even come. They should come and see that we have not destroyed their land, we have beautified it. We have made it an oasis. If they have any intelligence, their whole government should help us to make this big desert into a lush, green, beautiful place. And we are ready to put in any kind of intelligence, labor, planning, everything.
But rather than helping us, they are creating every kind of legal hindrance – although in every court we are defeating them, but still, work is delayed. And four hundred sannyasins are working in our legal department. This is unnecessary – and we are certain to win because we are not wrong on any point, and in every court…
A few days ago, the attorney general declared six hundred thousand dollars’ punishment because we had made a few tents without permission. Tents don’t need permission, but because we had made winterized tents – they were a unique, new thing. They should really have praised it, that we have made a new kind of tent which can be used in winter, in snow. But instead they put a case against us. And the attorney general fined us six hundred thousand dollars for making permanent structures without permission.
I told my people, “Simply take a tent to the court. Unfold it in the court, fix it – it takes ten minutes to fix; then unfix it – it takes ten minutes to roll it down and put it in a bag, and ask the court, ‘Is this a permanent structure?’”
That was enough argument, and the court simply dismissed the case. Now, this attorney general should jump in some lake and commit suicide. Idiots! At least you should have come and seen what we are doing. But Oregonians seem to be shameless. They don’t have any sense of feeling. Now they are in another litigation against the city, that it is illegal. This is a unique city in the world – an illegal city! There are cities or there are no cities, but have you ever heard of an illegal city? And particularly a city where no crime has happened in four years: no rape, no theft, no murder. And a city where no rape happens, no murder happens, no stealing happens, is illegal? And cities like New York, where every kind of crime is happening every moment, are legal cities.
People should have a little more humanity and they should start trying to understand strangers. We are strangers, naturally they feel afraid – they don’t know us. That is one of the weaknesses of mankind. It is always afraid of the new, afraid of the strange. We are strangers, but we don’t want to remain strangers. That’s why I’m talking to you and to every journalist, so that you can see we are not coming in flying saucers from other planets.
Our lifestyle may be different, but it is better than your lifestyle. You can come and see, and compare. You can invite us to see your lifestyle, we can invite you to see our lifestyle. And we are absolutely certain that anybody who comes to see our lifestyle is going to praise it, because not a single person is in misery, not a single beggar, not a single person is on the street – hungry, without clothes, without shelter – and everybody is living equally, without any communism being imposed on them. Everybody is respected equally; it does not matter what his work is.
They should come and see these smiling, laughing, dancing people, and I don’t think that they will not change their minds. But they don’t come. And of course I cannot take my whole circus on the road; that is not possible because I cannot provide everywhere air-conditioned rooms for five thousand people. They should come. And we have all the facilities, hotels for them to stay in – they will not miss anything. Anything that they can get in a five-star hotel they will get here in our hotel, which is not even one star. We still have to make a five-star hotel. Once we make five-star hotels, then your five-star hotels will be just junk!
They should come and see what our people are eating, how healthy our people are. Their water is pure, their food is pure, and as far as possible everything is being made by us – even things like my watches. You may be thinking it is a Piaget – you are wrong. The Piaget costs a quarter of a million dollars. This is made by my sannyasins, and the Piaget people should be ashamed. These are not diamonds; these are just real stones, authentic stones. But with stones we can create a quarter million-dollar watch and we have not spent anything on it, almost nothing. These are stones. Our people have made my watches; they love me, they want to do everything for me.
Everything, from my shoes to my hat, is made by my own people. And I love it because it has a flavor, it contains their love. If somebody asks me to sell this watch for one billion dollars, I am going to say no – not even for ten billion dollars. It is not for sale, because love is never for sale. It has no price, although it is a very cheap watch.
Osho,
Do all the guns and the helicopters and the sentries, do they make you feel more secure?
There is no reason for me to feel insecure. I have lived my life so totally that if I die this very moment, I will not be losing anything, because tomorrow is going to be simply the same story.
So I don’t need tomorrows. If they are given by existence, good; if not, I don’t need them. I have fulfilled myself. For thirty-two years I have been living a posthumous life. In these thirty-two, thirty-three years, if I was killed – and many attempts have been made on my life, but I have never felt insecure. There is no insecurity for me.

When I was a professor in the university, insurance people used to come to me saying that I should get insured.
I said, “That is stupid, because I never feel any insecurity. Why should I get insured?”
“No,” they would say, “for your children.”
I would say, “I am unmarried. Do you want me to produce children the way Jesus was produced? Just for your insurance policy, I have to produce children?”

I don’t feel any insecurity. I am secure in my own inner reality because I know that there is no death, that my innermost core is eternal, so no bullet can reach. As far as my body is concerned, it is going to die someday anyway, and as there are only seven days in a week, what is the choice? Monday is as good as Saturday. I don’t think that Saturday will be better – at the weekend – or Monday will not be good because it is an office day. I don’t have any office. I am always on the weekend, so there is no problem.
And these people are living with me now. There was a time – for thirty years – when I was traveling alone around India, not even a single person with me, facing hostile crowds of thousands of people. But I have never felt insecure, for the simple reason that if I am saying the truth, how long can you remain hostile?
Is the watchful eye of security here to keep outsiders out, or to keep insiders in?
No, the purpose of the security is just that we don’t want any nuisance. Inside there is no problem. But just two days before, two people who have been coming for ten days continuously – and because the police force, which is part of the government police, suspected them, they did not allow them in, today somehow they simply ran their car… The traffic policeman had to get to the side, because they were not going to stop. They were going full speed, and he was trying to stop them, but they were not going to stop. Now, the policeman could have fired, but my people don’t want to harm anybody, so he simply stood by the side and informed. Because it was the morning meeting time, they rushed into the temple, and started screaming and shouting. We enjoyed it – there is no problem. But then the police took them away; they could not allow us to enjoy more.
But they are Oregon’s police, we don’t have anything to do with it. We don’t have a jail here in the city; we don’t have even a police station where we can keep somebody for a few hours. They were delivered to Wasco County. That is their business; they should do whatsoever they want to do. But as far as we are concerned, we enjoyed the scene. These people think they are Christians and they had come to save my people – they were saviors!
Jesus has given such rotten ideas to people, that if I get this man I’m not going to hit him on one cheek, because he will offer the other. Why waste time? I’m going to hit him on both his cheeks and ask him, “Where is your third cheek? Give it to me!” Jesus has given an ideology to people who have been for centuries behaving madly – neurotics, psychotics. They have murdered millions of people, burned thousands of women alive, and they cannot even allow us if we don’t want to be saved!
Is it compulsory to be saved? And particularly as we are already saved, we have told them, “We are already saved, go and find people somewhere who are not yet saved.” But they had come to save us. And do you think shouting and screaming is going to convince anybody? Yes, it will convince people that you are simply nuts.
So those guards are simply to keep the nuisance out. Inside there is no problem at all. And even then it rarely happens, because these Oregonians are such cowards that they don’t even come to create a nuisance. They just go on gossiping everywhere, from the streets to their assembly – they go on talking about us. Nobody knows exactly what we are, what we stand for.
Just a few days ago, there was a professor from a California university on television. He is thought to be an expert on cults. What kind of expert is he? He has never been here – so close. And he is talking about me, condemning me. He knows nothing about me, he knows nothing about this commune. I have sent a challenge to him: that he can come, and I am ready to discuss with him. How much religion does he know, I would like to know. And what kind of expert is he? That too, I have to see. I know these experts, these professors, who just collect knowledge sitting in a library. That is not knowledge – that is all bullshit.
Osho,
One of the things that has gotten spectacular coverage from the press is the sexual activities of Rajneeshees. What kinds of sexual practices are people encouraged to participate in?
Nobody is told to participate in any sexual practice. Sex is something natural, you need not learn about it. You don’t have to go to school to learn about sex. People know already what to do and they do it. In fact, only here are they naturally free to do whatsoever they feel like doing.
Everywhere else they are repressed. And because they are repressed by Christianity, by Hinduism, by Buddhism, by all kinds of ideologies, their repression sooner or later expresses in some perverted way. They become homosexuals, lesbians, masturbators, even making love to animals – and this is the result of your religions. Because of all these perversions, a greater danger than nuclear weapons is now facing humanity, which is AIDS. It is a religious disease. All the religions have contributed to it by enforcing celibacy on people.
Celibacy is unnatural. Forcing monks to live in one monastery and nuns to live in another, and with no way for men and women to meet each other – so what you expect? Homosexuality was absolutely predictable, and out of homosexuality, the ultimate is AIDS. Now it is spreading like wildfire, and nobody seems to know what to do to prevent it.
Nothing is being done anywhere in the world, except in this commune. All our sannyasins went immediately for tests, because it is a question of the whole commune: if one person has it, he can infect the whole commune. And infection does not need actual sexual intercourse, just kissing. Saliva is a carrier. A woman is crying and weeping and you console her… Now, just think of Jesus’ sentence again: “Blessed are those who mourn.” But if God tries to wash their tears and console them, he may get AIDS, because tears carry the virus. Any liquid coming out of your body has the possibility of carrying the disease. It is a strange disease. Who is responsible for it? It is spreading and nobody knows what to do, and nobody wants to do anything.
But we have done; we have taken all the precautions. All our sannyasins have been tested, and only two persons have been found positive. Those two people are living in the most beautiful house that we have, in the most scenic place, by the lake. All that is necessary to them is provided – the best we can do, better than we are doing for other sannyasins – because those people are not going to live much longer, at the most two years. That is the maximum. In fact, they are not going to live more than six or eight months, because there is no cure for it. But we have segregated them, put them separate, with all facilities and whatever they need, and with all respect because they are victims – victims of popes, victims of messiahs, victims of prophets. Those poor people are suffering because of Moses and Jesus and Abraham, Mohammed and Buddha. Anywhere else they would be condemned.
So, a problem has arisen around the world: nobody wants to be tested because who knows, he may have the disease. And if the society comes to know, then even your own family will not accept you in the house: “Just pack your luggage and get lost!” All those people who had said they love you, all those people who had said they would sacrifice their life for you – your wife, your children, your parents – they will be unanimous, “Just get lost, don’t enter the house.” Your friends will turn into enemies. You will be thrown out of your job. You will become a sub-human person. You will lose all your dignity, all your respect, all your integrity, and you will feel condemned.
So information is prevented. If somebody is found with AIDS, he bribes the physician to keep it to himself: “Don’t tell anybody. Otherwise, before AIDS kills me, the people will kill me.” There are millions of people with the disease already around the earth. But governments are also repressing the information, because they don’t want to be condemned around the world that their country has AIDS. That means their country has homosexuality, lesbianism, sadism; that their country is a perverted, sexual place. No government wants that to be known. No religion wants people to come to know how many AIDS sufferers are in the church or in the synagogue.
But it is a very dangerous thing not to make everybody aware who is carrying the disease, because that is the only way to prevent it. The person who is already sick cannot be saved, so make his life as beautiful as possible for the few months he is going to live, and don’t condemn him.
Those two sannyasins are here with no condemnation, with all the respect of the community, with all that we can provide for them. And they are resting, meditating. If they can die in deep meditation then perhaps AIDS has not done them any harm. Perhaps it has proved a blessing in disguise. For six or eight months they will be just meditating by the side of the lake, under the trees, under the moon. They may not ever have had that much time just for meditation, completely free of all responsibility.
Our effort is to change every misfortune into a blessing, and we are grateful to those two people because they did not resist, did not protest that they did not want to be tested. In the outside world people are not willing to be tested; they are afraid of the test. If the test comes and proves them to have AIDS, they are gone. So in the outside world nothing is being said. The pope is silent about AIDS – and he is not a silent person.
Right now he is visiting South Africa, which has the fastest rate of population growth, which is already over-populated and suffering, starving. The government is of white people, and the white people are only fifteen percent of the population. They are ruling over the eighty-five percent black people. They have encroached on every valuable thing that is in South Africa – all the gold mines, silver mines, diamond mines; everything that is valuable is in the hands of the fifteen percent. The eighty-five percent exist just like slaves. They don’t even have the right to vote: only the fifteen percent white people have the vote.
The pope is visiting South Africa and is teaching those poor South Africans, “Don’t use birth control methods, don’t use abortion; it is against God, and is a great sin.” They are dying – overpopulated, hungry, starving – and this Polack comes there to teach them against birth control.
And in South Africa AIDS is one of the major problems right now. More blacks have been found to suffer from AIDS than white people. Perhaps it has something to do with their different physiology – they have a little different physiology – or perhaps it has to do something with the climate.
Even three monkeys in South Africa have been found to have AIDS. The scientists who have found these monkeys are all men, so naturally they concluded that AIDS has arisen from monkeys. I could not believe it. When I received the information I said that man is so chauvinistic, macho. The simple conclusion would have been that these three poor monkeys have received AIDS from man, because in Africa – or in forests or mountains where a woman is not available – men are known to make love to animals. And monkeys have the same physiology, so it is easier to make love to monkeys than to any other animal, they are your cousins. I say confidently that those monkeys have been given AIDS by man, not vice versa.
No wild animal has been known up to now to be homosexual. But in zoos it happens: if females are not available, then monkeys start becoming homosexual, other animals start becoming homosexual. Our monasteries are zoos, our university hostels and colleges are zoos. Don’t allow man and woman together, and you are going to create perversions in their minds. Then those people will suffer because of your strange doctrines, strange ideas.
Now, it is simply lunatic to teach people celibacy. It is almost like saying to people to control pissing. And if somebody starts that movement, you should not be amazed, he will find followers! But they will all be hypocrites – they will piss somewhere, in some way, but they will keep up the hypocrisy that they never piss.

I have heard that two small children – one a little older, six years old, the other smaller, five years old… A few monks, Christian monks, were passing on the street. The smaller boy asked, “I am always puzzled. Do you know, can you tell me something? What is the difference between a man and a monk?”
The other one said, “I don’t know exactly, but I have heard the older boys say that the difference between a man and a monk is very small.”
The little boy said, “Please explain to me what little difference.”
“The little difference is that the monks use their ding-dong only for pissing.”
The little boy said, “I don’t understand.”
The older one said, “I don’t understand either, but this is what I have heard from older boys. Boys who are old enough, perhaps they know. It is mysterious.”

You cannot use your ding-dong only for pissing. No, the ding-dong is made for two things: ding and dong.
Okay?

============================================================

Prem Prabhati,
Munich, Germany
Osho,
I'm grateful that I can ask you some questions about Osho Therapy because I'm going to write a book about it.
I'd like to know how your approach differs from all the former therapies like the Freudian psychoanalytic approach, the humanistic and the growth groups.
It is basically and totally different from any other therapy that has existed. The most fundamental difference is that all those therapies are for sick people, those who are not well mentally. Those therapies make an effort to put the people back into their normal life; the therapies serve the old rotten society. The society drives people mad, crazy, schizophrenic. The therapies put them back into their normal, average mind so they can function again in the old pattern – where they had become incapable of functioning.
So, all the therapies – Freudian or Jungian or Adlerian – their function is the same as was the function of the priest in the past. These are the priests of a sophisticated twentieth century, but their function is the same. It is against revolution, against change.
Rather than seeing why this society goes on creating sick people… No animal is sick in that way. Why does human society goes on making schizophrenic people? Why are there so many rapes? Why are there so many people burdened with guilt? Why are there so many murders, suicides? And even if a person somehow manages to live normally, deep down nobody is normal. They all have nightmares, they all have fear, they all have greed, they all feel insecure. Those therapies are in the service of the society that drives people nuts.
My basic difference is that I am trying to help the people understand that they are not responsible for their mind sickness; they are victims. My function is not to make then normal so that they can go back to the church, and back to the office, and back to the same wife, and back to the same world. No, my function is to give them a fresh individuality, a rebellious intelligence, a perception in which they can see that the society has manipulated them, exploited them, almost killed them. This is the first part of my therapy: the person should be made aware that it is the society that is sick, and he is only a victim.
Secondly, we have to make the person aware that he is a victim because he is more intelligent than other people. Idiots don’t go crazy, they have nothing to go crazy: to have a sick mind, first you need to have a mind. The normal, average people who are thought to be mentally healthy are really intellectually retarded. Even if they want to go mad they cannot. Madness needs some intelligence.
It is not a coincidence that all the great painters, poets, scientists, musicians – people who have touched the highest peak of intelligence in some dimension – most of them go mad, most of them commit suicide. Strange! We have created really a strange world where idiots are normal and geniuses are abnormal; where idiots don’t go mad, where geniuses go mad, suffer all kinds of mental torture. And the old therapies try to put them back, to force them back into the ordinary retarded humanity.
Of course they are a minority, so naturally they think something is wrong with them. Among millions of people who are retarded, to be intelligent is really unsafe. It is insecure, it is dangerous. Where people are living below the mental age of thirteen – that is the mental age of the masses – to have more intelligence than them is going to create trouble for you. They are the society, you are just an individual – helpless.
My effort is to make these people aware that their sickness is significant. They need not feel embarrassed; they should really rejoice, because they have intelligence – enough intelligence, more intelligence than the ordinary, normal people. That’s why they are having trouble. They cannot adjust with the society; they feel misfitting everywhere. That’s what gives people the idea that something is wrong with them.
The reality is just the opposite. They are the right people, but they are in a very small minority. The majority is stupid but it is the majority, and your so-called therapists are simply serving the vested interests.
So, my effort is to give you confidence that your sickness is symbolic, that you don’t have a retarded mind, that you should not feel bad about it. In fact, you should feel grateful to existence because you have raised questions which ordinary people don’t raise. You have created problems in your life which ordinary people don’t create. And because you did not fit with the majority, the masses, the crowd, they denounced you as mad.
The Freudians and the Jungians and the Adlerians all accept that idea that you are mad and you need treatment. And their whole treatment is bringing you down to the lowest common denominator in society.
My effort is just the opposite: first to make you feel relaxed about your situation; to make you recognize that the society is sick, not you; that the society needs a change, a revolution, not you. If you do not fit with the society, the reason is not that you are mad. The reason is that you have enough intelligence that you cannot fit with all these retarded people.
Secondly – which is even more important – my therapy helps you first to regain your confidence, your self-respect, the understanding that nothing is wrong with you; but this is only the groundwork. Then the real work starts. Once you are free from all the ideas that the masses have given to you, the psychologists have given to you – everybody around you has forced you to believe that something is wrong with you; first we have to clean all that nonsense and make you self-respectful. Then begins the real work: meditation. Therapy is only preparing the ground. It is not enough; it is just to undo what the society has done to you. Once it is undone, once you are unburdened, then the real work begins – the exploration into your own interiority.
So, therapy, according to me is only a groundwork for creating the space and the urge to explore your reality. All those therapists, psychoanalysts, psychiatrists have nothing to do with meditation. They are not there to help you to grow. In fact, they are there to cut as many branches from you as possible – your height, your growth – so you become similar to other pygmies. And because you accept the ideas of the common mass, you allow them to cut your intelligence, to destroy your questioning, to hinder any possibility of going deeper than the ordinary people.
My work is first to unburden you, and then to give you the vision, the perception that this is not the end. Just not to be sick cannot be the end. Just not to be sick is not enough. You have to be psychologically healthy, whole. And unless you come to self-realization the work is unfinished.
Therapy stops at the point where you have become normal again, you have been dragged back. My work respects your sickness because it reflects the whole of society. You became a victim of it because you were more vulnerable, more open, more available, so you have been wounded from every side. You were more innocent and you were intelligent enough not to participate in superstitions, in idiotic ideologies. All this has become your condemnation.
Religions used to send you to hell. Now they have become outdated; nobody bothers much about hell. In fact, nobody believes in it. Now you are being sent to the couch of the psychoanalyst, which is a constant torture for years and years. In fact, there is not a single human being who has been totally psychoanalyzed. A strange kind of science you have! It takes seven years, nine years, ten years – still you are not fully analyzed, still the problems are there. Perhaps you have become more accepting of them, perhaps you have become aware not to express them in society, not to behave in such a way that people think you are strange. They have just taught you adjustment, and that takes years and thousands of dollars – just to be adjusted to idiots.
My effort is to give you back your individuality. And it is your individuality which has rebelled against the social norms. It is your individuality – a part of it – which refused to be destroyed. My function is to discover your whole revolutionary individuality, your uniqueness. I am not here to make you a cog in the wheel of this big civilization and culture that we have been creating for millions of years. We have ended by making the whole earth a madhouse.

There is a story by Kahlil Gibran: One of his friends went mad. He could not believe it, because that man was so intelligent, and he has been put into a madhouse. Gibran went to meet him; he was feeling very sad and sorry for him.
The friend was sitting on a bench under a tree in the garden of the madhouse. Gibran approached him, wanted to show his sympathy. The man started laughing.
Gibran said, “So it seems you have really gone mad. I am showing sympathy, compassion, my friendship, and you are laughing!”
The friend said, “I have to laugh, because those people who are really mad cannot convince me just because they are in the majority, that I am mad. In fact, since I have been in the madhouse I am immensely happy, because I have left the madhouse outside and here I can live as sanely as I want. Nobody is going to interfere. You should not feel sorry for me; I feel sorry for you. What the hell are you doing outside there in that great madhouse? Why don’t you come here and live with me?”
Kahlil Gibran was shocked, but a great question arose in his mind: “Perhaps the man is right?”

To me there is no perhaps. That man is right.
So, my therapy is a search to find your individuality, its uniqueness. And then once you are freed from the idea that you are sick, there opens a new dimension. You can grow into being more conscious, and ultimately enlightened.
So, I use your sickness for your ultimate health, wholeness. About that your therapists are completely unaware. They are even unaware of what they are doing; they are simply serving the politicians, the religions, the vested interests. They are not helping you. They are part of the status quo.
My therapists are not part of the status quo. My therapists are basically people who are helping you to get rid of all those ideas that people have forced into your mind that something is wrong with you. Once you are completely free of that garbage, meditation becomes simple, very spontaneous. Here, you drop out of the rotten society and you are available to the whole existence. Once you start getting roots and centered, meditations are very easy and they can lead you to the ultimate experience of life.
Those normal people never attain to that experience. They don’t have even the intelligence to become sick. It is just like a dead man cannot fall sick – or do you think a dead man can fall sick? A dead man is always healthy; there is no way to make him sick. Even if you inject him and put poison into him, there is no way – he will remain perfectly healthy.
It is life that is fragile and can be easily made sick, destroyed. Intelligence is even more fragile. If life is the tree, then intelligence is the flower – even more fragile; more colorful, more alive, more expressive, more poetic – but more fragile.
And enlightenment is the ultimate in fragility. It is just like the fragrance, you cannot even catch hold of it. You can feel its presence, you can smell its existence, but there is no way to have it in your fist.
So, my therapy is fundamentally different. Its purpose is different, its approach is different. The other therapies respect the society and condemn the poor individual. I respect the individual and I condemn the mob, because the mass of people has no soul in it. It is just a big crowd of almost-dead people who don’t know what life is, and who will never know what life is.
One has to look into people like Vincent van Gogh. Why did a man who could produce such immensely significant paintings go mad? In my opinion he never went mad. But according to everybody who knew him, he was mad. He was mad because he never worked, he never got well educated. He was mad because his family persisted, “Get educated” – they wanted to make him a priest – and he refused. “That job is respectable, that job is financially the best, it is powerful.”
But he refused, and he said, “I want to become a painter.”
The family simply said, “If you want to become a painter you must be mad, because what are you going to gain out of your paintings? If you want to become a painter, then we will have nothing to do with you. Just leave us alone, don’t bother us anymore.”
Hungry, without money – sometimes a few friends helped, but who was going to help him for long? And once a friend who had helped him saw his paintings, he stopped helping him because those paintings were not understandable. They were as mysterious as existence itself. But who was there to appreciate them?
His younger brother was very sad for him because he had a certain understanding about paintings. He used to work as a salesman for a big firm which was selling all kinds of art pieces, including paintings. He could understand a little bit. He had known the best paintings in the shop, he had seen the best sculptures. He had some sense and sensitivity.
So he used to send him just enough money so that he could eat two meals every day. And what would van Gogh do? – four days out of seven he would eat, and three days he would save the money to purchase canvases, colors. So he was eating only on alternate days.
Naturally, anybody would think this man is mad; he is starving but he continues to paint. And he is certainly insane, because he could not sell a single painting his whole life. Nobody was ready to give a single cent.
His brother – that younger brother who was supporting him – was very sad that he could not have even the consolation that somebody had purchased a painting; that at least somebody had come and appreciated. So he asked a friend, gave him money and told him, “Go to van Gogh and purchase a painting from him. I want to give my brother a little bit of consolation that at least there is one man who understands and is ready to pay.”
The man went. He had no sense of art, but he said to van Gogh, “I would like to purchase a painting.” Van Gogh could not believe it. Tears came to his eyes.
He said, “You are welcome, come inside and look. I have many paintings. Whichever you want you can take, and whatever you want to pay for it is more than enough. That you have come to purchase a painting is enough reward for me.”
The man said, “I am not interested in paintings. You can give me any, and here is the money.”
You can understand the shock of the man. His tears dried. He could not believe it. It was a simple, logical corollary. He said, “You must have been sent by my brother. Take this money back. And even if you bring millions of dollars, I am not going to sell any of the paintings to you. I will throw those paintings out and give them to beggars, but not to you. Just get out of the house.”
The man could not believe it. He said, “I am giving you money.”
Van Gogh said, “You are giving me money, but I can see that you don’t have any perception, any idea, any sensitivity for art. This must be my younger brother’s work.”
The man said, “It is strange that you figured it out so quickly. Yes, your brother has sent me and he has given the money. He wanted to give you some consolation. But you are a strange man.”
Now, that man must think van Gogh insane. He was not a very beautiful man, not even homely. He was a coal miner’s son; he had been brought up in poverty, in sickness, and he was almost starving. But his devotion to painting was religious. I call this quality religiousness. He never went to any church, he never bothered about any God, he never read any holy book, but he was a religious man. The way he painted, the way he sacrificed his life in colors, in canvases – it is something that can only be called religious. There is no other word to explain it.
No woman ever loved him. Again, his brother tried a prostitute, gave her money and said, “Just once in his life he should have the satisfaction that some woman wanted him.”
The prostitute was willing. There was no question: it was a simple business. She said, “You can send him. Give me the money in advance and you can send your brother.”
He tried to explain to the prostitute, “My brother has never known any woman because no woman will love him. He is not beautiful. Please try to help him so that he forgets that he is ugly, so that he forgets that nobody loves him.”
The woman said, “Don’t worry, this is our profession. There is no need to tell me – I know my profession perfectly well. Just send your brother.”
Vincent van Gogh was told by his brother, “A woman has approached me. She is very shy – she loves you but she cannot say it to you. She sees you painting on the beach, in the forest. She loves your paintings, she loves you even more.”
Van Gogh could not believe it. He said, “Is it another trick? Why are you after me? Because it hurts – you sent that man to purchase a painting. I understand your love for me, but you don’t see how wounded I felt. That man said, ‘Give me anything – anything will do. Just take this money, don’t waste my time.’”
His brother said, “No, I have nothing to do with it. The woman approached me.”
So Vincent van Gogh went to the prostitute, and of course as a professional she welcomed him. He could not believe it – all that welcome and warmth and love. He asked the woman, “Do you really love me? – because as far as I know, everybody says I am ugly. And I know it too, because I can see in the mirror, I am ugly. So what is impressive to you?”
The woman said, just laughingly, playing with his earlobes, “I love your ears, they are unique. I have seen many men…” And it was true, he had very long ears.
If he had been born in India the Jainas would have accepted him as their tirthankara, just because of his long ears. That is one of the qualifications of a tirthankara, a Jaina prophet: his earlobes should touch his shoulders. He would have been accepted by Buddhists as another Buddha; they have the same condition – earlobes. But he was born in a place where nobody would bother about his ears.
The woman could not find anything else to appreciate so she said, “You have unique ears.” And it was true.
He said, “You like them?”
She said, “I like them very much.”
He said, “Then wait, I will come back within half an hour.” And he cut off his ear, packed it in a box, rushed back with blood flowing all over him, and gave the ear to the woman.
He said, “Nobody has ever appreciated anything in me, you are the only one. Now I present this ear to you.”
The woman was shocked: certainly the man was insane. And immediately the neighborhood became aware that he was bleeding and he had cut off his ear. They reported it to the police and he was forced into a mental asylum.
He lived there for one year, and in that year he painted his best paintings. To the whole world he was mad; to the psychiatrist, the psychoanalyst, the therapist who was treating him, he was mad. If they had succeeded in treating him he would have been just a coal miner – back to the society he belonged in. But they could not succeed. Fortunately, they could not succeed with van Gogh. He went on painting the way he wanted. All his paintings were thought to be insane, and now each of his painting is worth millions of dollars.
If this man had come to my therapies, we would have made a Gautam Buddha out of him – not only because of his ears. He had the intelligence, the sensitivity; he just needed support, appreciation. He just he needed recognition, and immediately he would have become rooted, centered. And he had the capacity to grow as far as anybody can grow, but his whole life was tragic.
He was thrown out of the mental asylum because they could not do anything. He remained the same. He was becoming unnecessarily a burden on them: they had to purchase canvases, colors, paints, brushes, and the man was not changing a single bit. All their therapeutic work was useless.
Once out of the madhouse, he committed suicide. He wrote in his last letter to his brother, “I don’t see that there is any more that I can do. I have painted whatever I wanted to paint. Particularly this year in the madhouse has been of great significance. I always wanted to paint the sun as nobody has ever painted it, and I have succeeded. Now there is nothing else, so why unnecessarily suffer, starve, be condemned by everybody? I am a misfit. It is better to rest in death.”
Now, this man was not mad; he was in a mad world. He did not belong to this world. And I talked about van Gogh because that is the case with all artists, all poets, all people of intelligence, creativity, art, dance, music, sculpture. That is the case all over the world. My therapies will help them immensely. Freud cannot do anything for them; at the most he can reduce them so that Vincent van Gogh becomes a coal miner, Picasso becomes a clerk in a station. That is sanity.
These people who are thought to be insane – I have been to many insane asylums and the people who are thought to be mad are just different from the masses – that’s all. And they have more energy which needs expression. They cannot fit anywhere because they have a certain solid individuality. And they persist in remaining themselves; they have a certain rebelliousness in them. Even if they are condemned by the whole world they want to remain themselves.
My therapies are to help the misfit people in society to recognize that they are welcome in my commune. Here, nobody can manage to be a misfit, because everybody is a misfit. This is a society of people who don’t fit, so to be a misfit is just normal.
And everybody respects the other’s individuality. If it does not suit me, that is my problem, but I am not going to dump it on the other person. It is not his problem, it is my problem. If I cannot understand his painting, that does not make him insane, it simply means that I don’t have a sensitivity for painting. If I cannot understand his music, that means I don’t have an ear for music.
Just the opposite is happening in society; if you cannot understand somebody’s music, he is mad. And because you are the majority, the poor fellow starts feeling that perhaps he is mad, because everybody else agrees on his madness. Once a man accepts the idea that he is mad, insane, below normal, he has almost committed suicide.
So I have to drag these people back to life – and not only back to life but to a higher life, to a better life, to a more intense life. They are capable of it; that’s what has driven them mad in the first place.
So, therapy is the groundwork, and then comes meditation. Once a deep acceptance has come to you, then you can grow; you are nourished. And that’s why I wanted to create communes around the world, because even if a person goes through therapies and then back to the society, it will disturb him. In fact, he needs a totally new society. He needs people around him who love him just for the sake of love; there is no other reason. They may not understand his paintings, but they respect his creativity. They are not going to condemn him.
On the contrary, if they are interested they will learn how to appreciate painting, music, poetry. If I cannot understand your language, that does not mean you are mad. That simply means I don’t know that language. And if I am interested, I should learn the language. But just the opposite is happening all over the world: if people cannot understand your language, you are mad. You have to be forced to forget your language. You have to be forced to learn their language. And this is very destructive.
I don’t accept your therapists; even Freud, Jung and Adler were not completely psychoanalyzed. Freud was afraid his whole life. Many times his disciples – whom he had analyzed – wanted to analyze him. He refused. He knew perfectly well that being analyzed would expose him, he would have to tell all his eccentric, stupid dreams. Then who is going to accept him as the greatest psychoanalyst? He was just an ordinary man like everybody else. He would have to accept that he is afraid of death – so much so that even the mention of the word death used to give him a fit; he would become unconscious. He was very much afraid of ghosts – and he is the founder of psychoanalysis.
He needs to come here, wherever he is. He needs to go through the therapies available here. And he would have nothing to be afraid of because we do not condemn anything. If you have a nightmare it is perfectly good; human beings have nightmares. If you have a sexual dream it is just natural; you are only a victim of thousands of years of religious condemnation of sex.
I have been to aboriginal societies in India: strange – rarely does a person say that he has dreams. In an aboriginal society they don’t have dreams. Sigmund Freud would have completely freaked out that there are people who don’t have dreams. They don’t repress anything, so there is nothing left to dream about. They do whatsoever is natural. For dreams to exist, repression is an absolute necessity.
For example, if you want to have a dream about food, fast and you will have dreams about great, delicious plates, a Chinese restaurant. Your whole night will be just feast upon feast. But fasting is absolutely necessary. If you don’t fast, then you cannot dream of feasting. And the same is true about everything: if people have sexual freedom, nobody is going to dream about sex. For what? – he knows the experience, he is free to have it as much as he wants. There is nothing hanging over in his head.
But all the religions have repressed sex and filled people’s dreams with sexuality. Then a man like Freud came who started analyzing the dreams. It is such a vicious circle. You create the whole thing, then there are victims; then you need doctors, therapists, psychoanalysts to interpret those dreams. And a dream is a thing that you can interpret in as many ways you want.
To Freud, every dream ultimately becomes a sexual dream. Whatever you dream does not matter, he will find that it is sexual. If you go to Adler with the same dream, he is bound to find that it is will-to-power; it is ego, not sex. If you go to Jung, it is neither ego nor sex. He will find some esoteric explanation, perhaps in your past lives, in some mythologies. It is such a stupid situation that nobody bothers about these psychoanalysts. A single dream in the hands of different psychologists, psychotherapists, starts having different colors.
My reading is that Freud is sexually repressed, that’s why he finds sex in every dream of a person. The man is a poor victim of analysis. Adler is a very egoistic person and wants to become as powerful as possible. He projects his mind upon some poor person. Jung is esoteric, mythological, believes in fictions; he projects his fictions upon you. These three have destroyed many people’s lives, and their disciples are still doing the same all over the world.
My therapists are on a totally different trip. They have to clean your mind of all the unnecessary ideas that have been imposed by the society, its psychoanalysts, its doctors, its so-called wise men. They want you to become again a simple, innocent child, as you were born. A rebirth – that is the work of my therapy.
Once I have got the innocent child, then the work of therapy is finished. Then the work of meditation starts. Then you are healthy, whole and ready to take any quantum leap; you are ready to go into the unknown.
In the East meditation has existed, but without any therapy. It was half: if you don’t clean the ground and you start sowing the seeds, your roses will be lost in the grass that will be growing there. First you have to remove all the grass and any possibility for grass to grow. Therapy is missing in the Eastern approach, that’s why enlightenment has happened only rarely, very rarely. Among millions of people, perhaps one becomes enlightened. Just the opposite should be the case: among millions of people, perhaps one should miss, because enlightenment is just a natural phenomenon.
Without therapy, the East has missed much. Without meditation, the West has missed much. I am bringing the East and West together, because separately neither is going to create the whole man. Both together, in an organic unity – therapy plus meditation – are equal to religion. That is my formula.
Any other questions?
Osho,
Yes, we all seem to be stuck about when to express and when to witness.
There should be no problem about expressing and witnessing. You can do both together and you should do both together.
That's difficult.
Just a little bit difficult in the beginning, but immensely paying. And it is only a question of a little effort. Otherwise, if you try only to be a witness, you will be repressing. What will happen to your expression? And that repression has been a problem for the whole of humanity. So now you will be using witnessing as a method to repress. The result will be the same as has been out of all repression. If you express and forget the witness, there is not going to be any growth of your consciousness. Everybody is doing that. No, you have to do both together. And they can be done both together.
For example, I am speaking to you – this is expression – but deep within me there is my witness, watching me saying something to you, watching you, watching every expression on your face, in your eyes. And I don’t see that there is any contradiction.
The idea of contradiction has been created by cunning people. So it just needs a little effort. Try with very small things. For example, you are cleaning the floor: now, it is not much of a great creative activity – why can you not witness too? You are walking, a morning walk in the hills – why can’t you watch yourself walking? What is the problem? Walking is such a simple exercise that the body is doing it, and you can remain centered inside and you can watch each step.
If you ever go to India, go to the place where Buddha became enlightened. Now there stands a temple in his memory, the bo tree under which he became enlightened – it is not the same but it belongs to the same bo tree. Bo trees have one thing very special: their roots grow down from their branches. So there are bo trees which are thousands of years old. Perhaps the original has died, but its descendants…
In India, the original bo tree was burned by Hindus. But before it was burned – long before that – Ashoka, one of the emperors of India, had sent branches of the bo tree to all the Buddhist countries. So when the bo tree was burned, a branch from Ceylon – where the original bo tree’s branch had become a big, huge tree – a branch was brought from there. So in a way it is the same tree, the same juice.
Just by the side of the tree is a small path; small stones indicate where his feet must have touched. That was Buddha’s way of meditating: walking one hour, walking continuously for one hour with full awareness; then one hour sitting under the tree doing nothing, simply watching whatever is happening inside. A thought moves on the screen of the mind, a feeling comes, or a bird suddenly starts singing and the sound comes to you, or the wind blows and in the tree its music is created, its whisper – anything that is happening around you, outside or inside, you have just to be a witness.
He had chosen both. Witnessing when you are not doing anything is simple, but once you know the taste of witnessing, then you can start doing small things like walking. There is no need to get lost into that activity. Then you can go to more complex activities: painting or playing on a guitar or dancing. Then any activity can be done, and you will be immensely surprised that all activities are the same. Whether you are washing the floor, walking or playing music, the basic methodology is the same, that you remain a witness at the same time.
The witness need not be lost in the activity. And once you know that the witness is totally a watcher upon the hills, and every activity is there in the valley, far far away from you, then no activity touches you. Then your activities start changing their nature, their quality, because a witness brings a radical change in you. You cannot kill; your witness will not allow you to do that. You cannot be jealous; before the fire of your witnessing, all jealousies, greed, anger, hatred will simply be burned.
According to me, whatsoever witnessing allows you to do is good. That is my criterion of good. And whatsoever your witness destroys and does not allow you, is bad.
So basically, reduced to the simple formula, there is no need to create a great theology of what is right and what is wrong and what is moral and what is immoral. I give you a simple key, a master key: Just witness your activity. If it is not good, it will fall of its own accord. The witness will not allow it to happen. Not that it will interfere, not that it will stop it; no, just its presence is enough. Anything wrong is impossible. And whatever is possible is right.
So I don’t give you detailed disciplines, “Do this, don’t do this,” because something may be moral in one situation and immoral in another situation. Something may be good today, may not be good tomorrow. Life is continuously changing, it is a flux. Who knows what turn the river of life will take tomorrow? So I don’t give you any detailed discipline, because every detailed discipline has made man a slave. He has to follow a certain doctrine, knowing perfectly well that it is against his consciousness, against his intelligence, against the situation – but what to do? – he has taken a vow to follow the doctrine.
My sannyasins don’t have any discipline, no law to follow, nothing. They just have to be witnesses and then they are free. Their witnessing will decide what is right and what is wrong. And once you are a witness you cannot do wrong; it is just not in the nature of witnessing. So a simple formula of witnessing changes your whole life, your whole perspective. Your way of seeing things, doings, actions, everything will be changed without any effort to change it. And that is where beauty lies.
If somebody tries, as Mahatma Gandhi was continuously trying, to be nonviolent – I wrote him a letter. I was very young, “Your very effort of continuously trying to be nonviolent shows one thing, that you are a violent man. Otherwise why are you making that effort?”
If somebody is continuously making an effort not to steal, what will the conclusion be? That man is a thief. He is trying hard not to do it, but the desire to do it is there. And the more he is trying not to do it means that the desire is not weak, it is very strong. That’s why stronger effort is needed to repress it. All your saints have been doing that: forcing themselves to be celibate, making every effort, strenuously doing everything that other idiots have told them.
For example, in India all the saints will tell you that if you want to remain a celibate, then take a cold bath before sunrise. Food – if you can live only on milk, then you will be more successful in your celibacy. Sleep as little as possible. Now, all these three things are dangerous.

I was talking to one of the so-called saints. He had become world famous – Swami Sivananda of Rishikesh, India – he had followers around the world, and those were his teachings.
I asked him, because he had been a medical doctor before he became a Hindu monk and renounced the world, I asked him, “Do you realize what you are teaching? Because a cold bath makes a man more sexual; have a good, ice-cold bath and after that you would like to make love.
“Living just on milk you will be more sexual than ever, because in the whole kingdom of animals, it is only man who drinks milk his whole life. Other animals drink milk only in their childhood for a few months, maybe for a few years. But you will not find a bull milking a cow – there is no need.
“So the first thing,” I told him, “you are teaching something unnatural. A child needs food – liquid, easily digestible. He is not doing anything, so he has to live on milk. And milk fulfills almost all his needs. It is wholesome food.
“But the moment he starts getting a little bigger, and is capable of eating solid things and is able to digest them, then slowly milk should disappear out of his diet. It is dangerous because it is unnatural – one thing. It is also dangerous because a human child needs the milk of a human mother; because that is what he needs. Drinking the milk from a cow will give you the sexuality of a bull, because that cow was never made for you.”
And I said to him, “You are a medical man, you can understand that it was not made for man, it was made for the bull – and it will make you a bull. And celibacy will become more difficult.
“Then you suggest sleeping as little as possible. What is the fear of sleep? The fear is, because you are repressing sex, in sleep there will be dreams, and they will be sexual. So reduce sleep. But reducing the sleep means the man will be sleepy the whole day.”

That’s what the saints – you will find it everywhere in India, the whole day. This is a strange kind of spirituality. But once you get caught in any idea which is unnatural, and if it has been traditionally there for thousands of years, you never inquire.
Why are so many people sexually repressed? And what is their sexual repression doing to them? It is making them perverts, making them homosexuals, making them make love to animals. All kinds of perversions have ended in the disease AIDS.
I call AIDS a religious disease: religions are responsible for it. Every government should make a law against celibacy, that anybody trying to be celibate should be imprisoned immediately – and imprisoned with women, otherwise the jail is also a monastery; women are separate, men are separate. So what the monastery does, the jail does also, the army does, and hostels, universities.

When I became a teacher in the university, the first thing I did – because as I entered the class, I saw the girls sitting in this corner, four or five empty rows just in front of me, and the boys sitting in the other corner. I said, “Who am I going to teach – these tables and chairs? And what kind of nonsense is this? Who told you to sit like this? Just get mixed and be in front of me.”
They hesitated. They had never heard a teacher telling them to mix. I said, “Get mixed immediately, otherwise I am going to report to the vice chancellor that something absolutely unnatural, unpsychological is happening.”
Slowly, hesitantly… I said, “Don’t hesitate! Just move and get mixed. Every day in my class you cannot sit separately. And I don’t mind if you try to touch the girl, or the girl tries to pull your shirt. Whatever is natural is accepted by me, so I don’t want you to sit there frozen, shrunken. That is not going to happen in my class. Enjoy being together.
“I know you have been throwing slips of paper, stones, letters. There is no need; just sit by her side, give the letter to the girl, or whatever you want to do – because in fact you are all sexually mature, you should do something. And you are just studying philosophy! You are absolutely insane. This is the time to study philosophy? This is the time to go out and make love. Philosophy is for old age, when you cannot do anything else – you can study philosophy then.”
They were all so afraid. Slowly, slowly they relaxed, but other classes started feeling jealous of them. Other professors started reporting to the vice chancellor, “This man is dangerous. He is allowing boys and girls to do the things which we have all been prohibiting. Rather than stopping them getting into contact with each other, he is helping them. He says, ‘If you don’t know how to write a love letter, come to me. I will teach you. Philosophy is secondary – it is not much, we will finish the two years’ course in six months. The remaining one year and six months, enjoy, dance, sing – don’t be worried.’”
The vice chancellor finally had to call me, and he said, “I have heard all these things. What do you say?”
I said, “You must have been a student in the university.”
He said, “Yes, I have been. Otherwise how could I be the vice chancellor?”
I said, “Then just go back a little and remember those days when girls were sitting far away and you were sitting far away, what was going on in your mind?”
He said, “You seem to be a strange fellow. I have asked you to come because I want to inquire about something.”
I said, “That we’ll take later on. First answer my question, and be sincere. Otherwise I will give you an open challenge tomorrow before the whole university, all the professors, all the students. We can discuss it and let them vote.”
He said, “Don’t get excited. Perhaps you are right. I remember – I am now an old man, and I hope that you will not say this to anybody – I was thinking of the girls. I was not listening to the professor; nobody was listening to the professor. The girls were throwing chits, we were throwing chits, letters were being exchanged.”
Then I said, “Can I go?”
He said, “Of course. Simply go and do whatsoever you want, but I don’t want a public encounter with you. I know you will win it. You are right, but I am a poor fellow, I have to look after my post. If I start doing such a thing, the government will throw me out of this vice chancellorship.”
I said, “I am not interested in your vice chancellorship. Remain vice chancellor, but remember, never call me again – because many complaints will come, but I make it clear to you right now that every time I will be right.”
He said, “I have understood.”
Then students – boys and girls who were not students of my subject – started asking me, “Can we also come?”
I said, “Philosophy has never been so juicy. Come! Everybody is welcome. I never take attendance: every month, when the attendance register has to go back, I just go…absent, present, absent, present. I just have to remember that everybody gets more than seventy-five percent present, so they can go to the examination. I don’t bother. So you can come.”
My classes were overpopulated, people were sitting at the windows. But they were really expected to be in some other class.
Then complaints came again, and the vice chancellor said, “Don’t bring any complaint about that man. It is your problem if people are not coming to your class. What can I do? What can he do if they prefer him? And they are not students of philosophy, but they don’t want to come to your history, your economics, your politics. What can I do? And that man has challenged me: ‘Never again call me in; otherwise you will have to face a public encounter.’”
But so many complaints came from every department that finally he had to come. He knew that it was better not to call me; he had to come to my class. He could not believe it: in philosophy there are very few students, because philosophy is not a paying subject. But the class was overcrowded, there was not even space for him to enter. I saw him standing in the door behind the students. I told the students, “Let the vice chancellor come in. Let him also enjoy the whole scene that is happening here.”
He came in. He could not believe his eyes: girls and boys were all sitting together and so joyously listening to me. Not a single disturbance, because I had prevented all the disturbances from the very root. Now, the boy was sitting by his girlfriend; there was no need to throw a stone, throw a letter. There was no need.
He said, “I cannot believe that it is such a crowded class and there is pin-drop silence.”
I said, “There is bound to be because there is no repression. I have told the students that when they want to go they need not ask my permission, they should simply go; when they want to come in they should simply come in, they need not ask my permission. It is none of my business whether they are here or not: ‘I enjoy teaching, I will go on teaching. If you want to sit here, sit. Otherwise get lost.’ But nobody goes away.”
The vice chancellor said, “This should happen to every class. But I am not a strong man like you; I cannot say to the government that this is the way it should be.”

The whole of society is trying to repress sexuality. And then perversion comes in; then perversion brings psychological problems.
My therapies are just to clean. Whatever perversions have entered in, you have to be brought back to their natural source; they have to be changed into expressions, not repressions.
And it is a miracle to see. When all your repressed energy becomes expressive you cannot believe that you have so much energy, and you can do so much that you can also be a creator. Right now society has played a very ugly game on human beings. It has turned them against themselves, as if there has been a teaching, “I have to put my right hand against the left hand, and I have to go on trying to win.” Who is going to win? It is my left hand, it is my right hand; they both belong to me.
But one thing is certain: if I get involved in such a conflict, I will be split. That is what schizophrenia is. People’s energies have been split against themselves, so half of the person is against the other half, and they are fighting – their whole life is wasted in fighting. The same energy could have made this existence more beautiful, more creative, more relaxed, more enjoyable. There would have been more love, more laughter.
My therapeutic work is to undo everything that society has done to you. The moment you are completely freed from society, that’s what I mean by sannyas: that you have dropped the prison that you have been carrying all around yourself, that you are no longer a caged bird. Although the cage was made of gold, and there was much investment in it, and it was so beautiful, a piece of art, it destroyed your freedom. It destroyed you.
My work consists of bringing you out of your cages – Hindu, Christian, Jewish, communist, theist, atheist. There are so many cages of all sizes and shapes; you can choose any cage, there is no problem.
Every shopkeeper who is selling cages is against me – every one, without exception – for the simple reason that I am teaching my people that cages are not the place to live. The whole sky is yours. Just open your wings and try to reach the stars.
Other therapies are doing just the opposite. You are somehow trying to get out of the cage. Perhaps a part of you is already out of the cage – that’s what the society calls crazy, insane. And the work of the psychoanalyst is to force you back, to convince you with all his jargon, “This is not right, you should not try to get out of the cage. The cage is your safety, security, your sanity. In the cage you are normal; outside of the cage you will become abnormal.”
I want everybody to come out of the cage and live a life of absolute freedom. This life of freedom will make him capable of one day knowing his ultimate reality. I am using therapy for the first time as the groundwork for meditation. Also I am using meditations on a base of therapy for the first time, because to me a person who starts meditating without going through therapy will have a tremendously hard time – and perhaps will never reach enlightenment. It is almost impossible; first he has to drop so many things, with all those things you cannot go on uphill, to Everest.

When Edmund Hillary reached the top of Everest, he had to throw away everything. They had carried all kinds of facilities, but by the time he reached there, even to carry a flask was too much – because the air is so thin and the oxygen is so little, breathing becomes difficult. Carrying even a small load – just a flask of coffee or tea – even that he had to drop. When he reached the top he was standing there alone. He even had to drop his overcoat on the way; it was becoming too heavy.

The same is the situation with enlightenment. It is an Everest of consciousness, and you will have to drop everything. You will have to unburden yourself.
Therapies help you to unburden, and meditation teaches you how to go uphill. Both together make the whole equation.
Okay.

============================================================

Leslie Porter,
Vogue, United States
Osho,
Hello. I have many questions to ask you about many different things and the first is: “How are you?”
I am always the same, just fine.
Just fine? Okay.
How do you think the world sees you?
To me everything is very simple; I never do anything that is not spontaneous. I just live in the moment: no attachment to the past moment, no projection for the future moment. I am always here now. These two words here now contain the whole of existence.
And after Albert Einstein, they are not even two words. It is one reality – space and time are four dimensions of the same reality. Time has three dimensions, space has one dimension; here has one dimension, now has three dimensions. But within these two words, everything is included. Einstein had to make a new word, because to express it exactly it is not good to use two words – that gives a sense of duality. So he invented the technical word, spacio-time.
I have also made my own word: nowhere – just one word, not even a hyphen between now and here.
Osho,
In a few words, could you comment on the word that I am going to give you? For example, what does love say to you?
It means three things. Love can exist as just a physiological relationship – then we call it sex, and most people go on believing that that is love. It is only the beginning.
The second thing that can be called love is something deeper, psychological – what poets talk about, what musicians sing about. It has nothing to do with sex, it is just a magnetic attraction between two persons. Something transpires between two persons – they suddenly feel as if they are made for each other. Something almost gives them the sense, “Without the other I am half, incomplete; with the other I’m complete.” A sense of completion is the second quality; a sense of being entire, the whole circle.
The first is very momentary, very superficial; the second is very deep, but needs great sensitivity. It is not available to everybody. The first is available to everybody: it is available even to animals, birds, trees, so there is nothing special in it as far as man is concerned. A man who has known love only as sex has remained below human dignity.
Humanity begins with the second. Only a few poets, a few musicians, dancers, a few sculptors have sensed it. In the whole of history, very few people around the world have lived it because it needs tremendous courage to dissolve yourself with somebody else – a moment when the other is no longer the other, a moment when you can feel a tremendous at-one-ment.

It happened in Ramakrishna’s life: he was a man of immense sensitivity. They were crossing the river Ganges in a boat, and just in the middle of the river he started shouting, “Don’t beat me! Don’t beat me!” The people who were around him were all his disciples, and nobody was beating him.
Tears were flowing from his eyes and they asked, “What are you saying? Nobody is beating you.”
But he was in a convulsion, as if somebody was hitting him hard. The disciples could not understand it. He fell down almost unconscious in the boat. They reached the other shore, and there they saw a man who had been beaten to unconsciousness. A crowd had gathered. The most significant thing was that as the man’s clothes were torn – his back had blood marks – they uncovered Ramakrishna’s back and found the same marks, and in the same way blood was flowing.

That is the height of the second quality of love, where you can feel such oneness that if the other is dying, you will feel like dying. Everybody hankers for the second quality, but it needs a certain training in sensitivity. For example, a person who is violent in his life – full of anger, jealousy, possessiveness – will not be able to experience the second quality. And he will remain frustrated his whole life because he could not get what he wanted. But nobody else is responsible for it; he never prepared to receive something higher, you have to deserve it.
In the first love there is no question of deserving: it is biological. You are already gifted because nature wants to continue reproducing; it has not left it to you. Nature has not left many things to man. For example, breathing has not been left to you. You may forget, you may get involved in some work and forget to breathe – in sleep you are bound to forget, then there is going to be no morning for you. So nature has kept the breathing under its own control.
Sex is the continuity of life, it cannot be left to you; it is in the hands of biology. But because it is in the hands of nature you feel a certain compulsion, a certain slavery, and that’s why sexual partners are continually fighting. They are not aware why they are fighting; why they fight the man they love, the woman they love. The reason is that each feels deep down, “The other is my trouble, my problem.” Jean-Paul Sartre has a very significant statement: “The other is hell.”
But as far as sex is concerned, the other remains the other. The other disappears only in the second stage, and I don’t think even Jean-Paul Sartre reached the second stage. He was a man of tremendous intelligence, but not of great sensitivity. They are different things: intelligence is of the head, sensitivity is of the heart. And in fact our whole education is to sacrifice the heart for the head. So the people who get your Nobel Prizes, none of them gets the Nobel Prize for the heart, they get the Nobel Prize for the head.
Your universities teach nothing about the heart, they only go on training and sharpening your head. For the head, the other is hell; for the heart, there is no other and that is heaven. Only very few poets and painters and that type of crazy people have known love. But that love also is psychological and your mind is not something stable; it is one thing today, it is something else tomorrow.
So with the change of the mind, with the change of your psychology – which is continuously changing – your love has to change continuously. That is a great problem. It is not necessary that the person you love will also change in synchronicity with you. He may lag behind, he may go further, he may stop moving – all the possibilities are there. And with his changing psychology…
A child may fall in love with another child: we call it childhood love. But as they grow older that love because a beautiful memory, it has no significance. A young person falls in love with another person: the child psychology is gone, its love is also gone. In fact, you will never get a more beautiful experience of friendship than you got in your childhood. Never again that joy of friendship – because as you become older, friendship is no longer your need: your need becomes more and more sexual.
Only rarely does a person who is young have a poetic sensibility, but that sensibility also changes. In fact, the more delicate a phenomenon is, the more the possibility of change. Retarded people – who remain below the age of fourteen as far as their minds are concerned – can remain faithful to their wives, to their husbands, their whole life. They stopped growing when they were fourteen, and at that very time their love also stopped – came to a full stop, the terminus. Now they will go on repeating the same thing their whole life.
But more intelligent people will find it difficult. Hence, as man becomes more civilized, more intelligent, one cannot live with one woman, with one man forever. If he tries to do that, both become sad, both become bored, both become frustrated with each other. That is the point when the other starts becoming hell.
People are afraid of reaching the second stage because it is just like a breeze: it comes and goes. When it comes it fills you totally. It gives you so much contentment that you cannot think there is anything more, and you cannot think that it can ever change. That’s why lovers go on promising each other – but their promises are not going to be fulfilled. Then they will feel guilty. Of course when they had given the promise it was not a lie, they were really, authentically feeling it. But it was the feeling of that moment.
After a time your psychology develops, your maturity develops; you start loving new things, new people. Your vision of beauty changes – your attitude in all its dimensions goes on changing. It is almost impossible for the other person to change exactly with you. Neither is it possible for you to change exactly with the other person. And that’s where the whole of society is living in tremendous suffering. We have forced people to live together because they had promised something. They don’t deny it, but what can they do? In that moment the promise was true, and then everything changed. Now they don’t feel anything for the other person – and it is not only that they don’t feel anything, they feel they are strangers.
You can look at husbands and wives and inquire, “Do you know your wife? How long has is it that you have not looked into her eyes? How long has is it that you have not given a moment to look at her or to listen to her?” Perhaps years have passed.
It is one of the strangest things that husbands cannot remember the face of the wife with whom they have lived for thirty years. Just ask them, “Close your eyes and try to remember your wife, her face,” and everything goes vague. For thirty years they have not looked at her. They have really tried not to look at her; they were afraid to look at her. There was a day when they wanted to look at her for the whole twenty-four hours.
Psychological love is a changing phenomenon, and unless humanity accepts its changeability gracefully we will never allow human beings to rise to the second level – because those who rise to the second level suffer more. Poets suffer more, farmers don’t suffer that way, woodcutters don’t suffer that way, fishermen don’t suffer that way. Painters suffer, musicians suffer, because they go on changing. They continuously need something new. Now, the other person cannot make that available. And the other person has his own individuality, her own individuality. They start growing farther and farther and farther away from each other. And society goes on forcing them to live together because, “Marriages are made in heaven.”
Osho,
Do you do any art work?
My whole work is art! I don’t do anything else except art work.
Do you dream? And what kind of dreams do you have?
No, I cannot dream.
You don't dream?
No.
Osho,
So you're enlightened, and I would like to know if there's another enlightenment after enlightenment.
No.
Just one, that's it, okay.
And if you were to go on vacation where would you go and what would you do?
I can just kiss from here! You may be on another planet, it makes no difference. What people call kissing is so unhygienic, so ugly: mixing saliva with each other, touching each other’s tongues, exploring each other’s mouth with the tongue – that is just not possible for me. There is no need. Just looking at a person with loving eyes is enough; you have touched.
Physical touch is a lower phenomenon. Just looking at a person with love, with compassion, with friendship, with respect, is enough. Eyes can reach any distance. Silence can say much, which words cannot do.
In India when we salute each other we don’t even shake hands. That is too physical. Unhygienic too – no medical person can support it. We salute each other with both hands folded. And it has a spiritual significance: we are giving you the same respect as we give to God. That’s the way people go into a temple, with folded hands. That’s the way they respect their elders. The same respect is shown to strangers. And two hands folded together represent what I was saying, the merger of two into one.
In the first kind of love, which is sexual, kissing is part of it, but in the second love, which is psychological, kissing is not a part of it. It is more an energy phenomenon than a material one.
Everybody has an aura of energy. Now it can even be photographed. In the East we have been talking about it for five thousand years, and perhaps the idea is even more ancient, but we had no way to prove it. Now there is a certain kind of photography – Kirlian photography – which has been developed in the Soviet Union by a photographer who has made such sensitive plates that when he takes a picture your energy aura also comes onto it. It differs from person to person. For example, a person who has never known anything more than sex, his energy aura is just two inches around his body. And the aura of a person who has known something of the second love is almost six inches around his body.
And there is a third love of which I was just going to speak, which is spiritual, which is not even psychological, which is more like lovingness, rather than love. There is no passion in it; it is more like a fragrance than a flower. You can catch hold of the flower, but you cannot catch hold of the fragrance. It is not like the flame of a candle, but the light of the flame.
In that third stage of love, the person has almost a twelve-inch aura around his whole body. People who know the third love can just sit silently together and their energies meet. You will think they are not even sitting close – as lovers sit very close to each other – they may be sitting with a gap between them. They can allow a gap of at least two feet when sitting together and yet their energies are touching, their energies are kissing. And that is a far bigger touch, not local; a kiss is a local touch. They can touch each other’s bodies totally, without touching the physical body at all.
And that love does not change because it is not dependent on the beloved, on the object of love. It is not dependent on the changing mind; it is something concerned with your eternal being. You may change, your body will change, your mind will change, but your love cannot change. It remains the fragrance of your being. Only at that point have two persons truly met.
It rarely happens between lovers – very rarely – but it happens between masters and disciples very often. That’s why I say that the relationship between a master and a disciple is a love affair of the highest category. And it is the goal that can fulfill. Those who have not known it have lived incompletely.
In that state whatever you do is art: you cannot do otherwise. The way you walk, the way you sit, the way you talk – even just the gesture of your hand has something artistic to it, something creative in it. That’s why I say I don’t paint, I don’t compose music, I don’t write poetry, but if you look deeply at what I am doing with my disciples – they are my canvas. I’m painting living beings. They are my poetry, they are my sculpture. I’m working continuously so that they can be released from all bondage and they can taste freedom, love, beauty.
I don’t paint on ordinary canvases and I don’t write poems on paper, but on living beings. And each of my sannyasins is my poetry. And each of my sannyasins will carry my gestures, my attitudes, my approaches. And he will make it even richer because he is a living person. He may give it more polish, he may give it more beauty; he has to do it. It will be his gratitude toward the master, it will be his thankfulness.
So, from morning ‘til night I am continuously creating. But to see my creativity you need to be part of it. You cannot be just a spectator. You have to be an insider, not an outsider, because it is so subtle and so delicate, so invisible, that unless you enter it with an open mind, without any prejudice, you will not be able to experience it. Just a little experience will open the door.
Osho,
Is that why you started talking again?
That’s true.
And what happened when you weren't talking? Do you miss not talking?
I was working in my silence.
What were you working on?
My people were sitting in silence with me.
I wanted to see how many people could understand my silence. I wanted those people who were hanging around my words to go away, because they were wasting their time. They should be somewhere else; this is not their place. They had become enchanted with my words, my theories, but it was an intellectual approach. So when I became silent they went on hanging around for a few days, then slowly they thought, “Now he’s not going to speak again, what is the point?” They could not understand silence.
The moment I saw that all those people had left, I started speaking again. Now these are the people who remained for three and a half years – not even asking, not even a single person asking me to speak. They were perfectly happy just with my presence.
It was of my own accord that I started speaking. If I had remained in silence for the remainder of my life, these were not the people to leave me. That’s why I am speaking to them – because these are my people. Now my talking is heart-to-heart.
And they don’t bother what I am saying, whether I am contradicting myself or not; it is none of their concern. They know me, they cannot be deceived by my words. They know me, and knowing me is such a deep relationship – who cares what I am saying?
Osho,
What do you think of Kahlil Gibran's saying, “When you have solved all the mysteries of life, you long for death, for it is but another mystery of life.”? “
Three words one has to understand clearly. One is the known; another is the unknown; and the third is the unknowable. The known was one day unknown; the unknown will one day become known. But the unknowable was unknowable before, is unknowable now, will remain unknowable forever. Only the unknowable is the mystery.
Science can deal with the known, with the unknown; science has no way even to conceive of the unknowable. And that is where religion becomes significant. That is religion’s area: the unknowable. And all the religions in the past have betrayed. They started trying to make the unknowable known – that was their betrayal. They all started trying to prove God. Once God is proved by arguments, he’s no longer God.
Karl Marx used to say, “I will believe in God only if you can put him in a test tube in the lab, dissect him, find all the qualities, all the constituents. Only then will I believe in him.”
One of his followers in India, Anand Roy – a very significant philosopher who had participated in the Russian revolution – was a friend of Lenin, a close friend. I asked him – because he was continuously writing about Karl Marx, his philosophy, and he was of tremendous reasoning, rationality, he could prove… I asked him just one thing: “In your book you write about Marx’s statement that he will believe in God only if God is in a test tube observed by scientists. I want to ask you, will that be God that scientists can dissect, can find out of what he is constituted? That will be something else: it won’t be God.”
But all the religions in the past have been trying to prove that which is unprovable. They have been trying to demystify existence, and I call it a betrayal. Let science do its work – that is science’s work, to demystify existence. Anything that is not known has to be made known, that’s the whole scientific approach, and, “We will not leave anything unknown in existence.” And it is possible to conceive that perhaps one day we will have exhausted the unknown.
But what about the unknowable? The scientist himself is unknowable. He knows everything, but he does not know who the knower is. In fact, he denies the knower – and that is so stupid.

I asked one of the Indian scientists, Khorana, who got a Nobel Prize, “You are a Nobel prize-winning scientist. Have you ever bothered that you go on searching, discovering new areas, but who is the seeker? Who is the searcher? Have you ever thought about yourself?”
He said, “I don’t have time for that.”
I said, “But this is strange, because whatsoever you can find cannot be more valuable than you, the finder. Whatever you can know, howsoever valuable it is, cannot be more valuable than the knower. It remains an object of knowledge.
“And you say you don’t have time for yourself? That is not a scientific answer. That is trying just to avoid the subject. You cannot avoid it. I, at least, will not allow you to avoid it. You have to say something definite. You have to say whether you exist or not. If you exist, then what are you – just matter, or something more?”
He said, “You are putting me in trouble, because if I say I am just matter, it simply does not feel right. How can matter discover matter? How can matter know the mysteries of matter? Matter has no consciousness. I can understand, so I have to accept that there is something more than matter. But please don’t insist, because science is not willing to accept the knower. Science’s whole approach is: unless something is experimented through scientific methods in a scientific lab, it cannot be accepted.”
I said, “Naturally, then the scientist will remain unknowable forever.”

And that is the arena, the area, of religion. And this unknowability of consciousness, this mysterious phenomenon in you – in everybody – is the most precious thing. Nobody can know it, but everybody can taste it. Nobody can reduce it into a theorem, but everybody can dive deep into it, its bliss, its serenity, its silence, its tremendous ecstasy. Nobody can explain it, but everybody is capable of experiencing it.
One of the great philosophers of Europe – perhaps the best of this century – was Ludwig Wittgenstein. He has a statement in his book, one of the rare books in the whole history of books: the name of the book is Tractatus Philosophicus. He never wrote treatises, he wrote only maxims. One of the maxims in that strange book is that one should not speak about something which cannot be spoken of.
I wrote him a letter – he was alive, now he is dead – “The moment you say one should not speak about something which cannot be spoken of, you have already spoken. You have said something, you have described a certain quality – that nothing can be said about it. That, too, is an attribute, and if you have said this much, then try a little harder. You yourself have broken your rule. You accept that there are things which cannot be spoken of – your statement certainly proves that you accept that there are things which cannot be spoken of. Certainly there must be some way to know those things which cannot be spoken of, otherwise how have you come to that conclusion?”
I say that there are things which cannot be explained, cannot be reduced into theories, theologies, philosophies – but which can become part of your experience, which can become the very light of your life, which can become the very center. It is not demystifying them, it is in fact entering into the mystery and becoming yourself a mystery.
That’s why in the East we have called saints “mystics.” We have not called them saints. Saints is a Christian contribution to the world, a very ugly word. It comes from the original root sanction. A saint is one who has been sanctioned, given a certificate from the pope. This is stupid: the pope himself is not a saint and he is issuing certificates – posthumous certificates.
Joan of Arc was made a saint three hundred years later. One infallible pope burned the poor woman – who was a rare woman in the whole history of man – burned her alive, declared that she was a witch. But people could see the ugliness of the whole thing. The woman was a genius – so young, so beautiful, yet so courageous. She alone was fighting for the freedom of the country – and she won. The whole country loved the woman, but that was the trouble. She became a competitor to the pope; she had to be destroyed.
She was burned alive, but by and by over three hundred years, the pope became condemned by people who realized the qualities of the woman. Her diaries were discovered. And she was such a beautiful, authentic, sincere human being, that after three hundred years another pope became afraid that if she was not given the sanction and made a saint, she would create a division in Christianity. To avoid that division she was declared a saint.
In the East we don’t use that word. We call these people “mystics,” and that exactly describes their world: the world of mystery. They are not demystifying it, they don’t give you any ideas about it. They hold your hand and take you on the journey. They do not give you any proof – they give you eyes to see.
And that’s the function of the master: not to give you a philosophy – just dead words, what are you going to do with them? The authentic master will give you some taste of reality. He will hold your hand, he will take you into unknown territories where you may be afraid to go alone. But the trust in the man, the love for the man, will not allow you to escape.
Osho,
Have you talked to the pope lately?
I have not talked to him but I have talked about him enough. And I don’t think he will be ready to talk with me, because I have been continuously condemning him and he knows about it. And I don’t see that anything that he is doing is right, so there is no meeting point either. Whatever I am doing is immoral in his eyes. What he is doing is criminal in my eyes.
Right now he is in South Africa, where he is not even touching the real problems. Eighty-five percent of the people are black, it is their country. The fifteen percent of white people are ruling over them. The country is very rich: it has diamond mines, it has gold mines, it has silver mines – it is really one of the richest lands in the world. But the people are dying, starving. The people are the poorest because all those mines are captured by the fifteen percent of white people, so all the riches are under the white people’s power.
You will be surprised to know that South Africa has one of the biggest armies in the world. That fifteen percent need it; otherwise, eighty-five percent of the people dying, and you are continuously exploiting their country… All of the fifteen percent – the white people – are immensely rich. And you will be surprised to know that even in the twentieth century, eighty-five percent of the people don’t have even the voting right; only the fifteen percent of white people vote. Naturally the question does not arise of any black people being in power. It is their country, it is their wealth, and they are continuously being shot dead, continuously being killed, burned. The pope is not touching the real problem.
And those eighty-five percent have the highest birthrate in the whole world: three percent per year. They are already overpopulated, and they are continuously reproducing and becoming more and more poor – because what inheritance can they give to their children? They don’t have anything.
The pope is preaching to them that birth control is sin, that abortion is a great sin. The government is trying to introduce birth control, abortion, and the pope is speaking against birth control, against abortion. He is going to be responsible for all the poverty that will happen. He will be responsible for all those starving, dying people. And he is not touching the real problems because that will disturb the vested interests, the white people.
So, no question about freedom, no question about voting power, no question about the white people leaving the country and going back to their own countries. Or, even if they want to leave, their own countries – they belong to different nations from all over Europe: Spanish, English, British, Dutch – their own countries are not going to accept them because they have been there for three hundred years, and their own countries are also in trouble with overpopulation.
My suggestion is that fifteen percent of the land of South Africa should be given to the white people, and fifteen percent of the wealth of the country should be given to the white people. And eighty-five percent of the land and eighty-five percent of the riches should go to the black people. The country should be divided. A simple solution – already they live separately, so there is not much problem; the black people are not allowed even to enter the areas where white people live. It is so simple.
I can understand the difficulty of the white people, that they have no home. Three hundred years is a long time, they cannot leave this country. Absolutely right, I accept it. It seems to be perfectly human that they should be given a place there, but they cannot have more than fifteen percent. They cannot have one hundred percent of the land, one hundred percent of the riches, with eighty-five percent of the people starving and dying.
And this idiot pope goes there and talks to those people. He’s not telling the white people – the white people are already practicing birth control, the pill, abortion, everything. He’s not talking to the white people.
Have you sent someone there to talk to the people?
No.
No?
Because I have tried for thirty years in India.
The poor people have many problems. One of the problems is that they are uneducated, illiterate. They cannot understand anything beyond their tradition, the tradition they have inherited. And their tradition is all superstition, stupid – for example the idea that God gives you children. Now, it is very difficult to convince those people. For thirty years I was trying hard to tell them that God cannot be so stupid as to give you so many children that you cannot even give them food. God cannot be so unkind.
If he is a compassionate God, as you call him, he should send each child with a piece of land, with some trees, some cows, something they can live on. He simply sends children naked, with not even any underwear! And he goes on seeing your children dying – in India, nine children out of ten used to die – and this is your God.
And there are people like the pope and Mahatma Gandhi – who was against birth control, against abortion, against inoculation, because it is against nature. Without inoculation many small children were suffering from smallpox and dying, but they would not accept inoculation. Birth control is just beyond their ideas: it means you are talking immorality, you are talking anti-religiousness.
In thirty years of talking to them, all the reward that I got were stones thrown at me, shoes thrown at me, knives thrown at me, poison given to me twice. That was the reward. And they will not go against their tradition.
Osho,
What happened to you when you physically died for seven hundred years, between your rebirths?
No. I never think of the future.
You never think of the future?
No, I think only of the present.
How's the present?
And I want to make the present as intelligent, as beautiful, as comfortable for my people as possible. I want my people to be as meditative as possible in the present. The future will take care itself; intelligent people will find a way. Who am I even to think about the future? That is a subtle strategy of dominating, even when you are dead.
Just the idea of creating a successor means I will continue to dominate you through my successor. That’s how the dead are dominating the living: Jesus, Moses, Buddha are still dominating people. This is ugly. The dead dominating the living is simply unacceptable to me.
Buddha lived twenty-five centuries ago. He knew nothing of electricity, he knew nothing of railway trains, he knew nothing of population growth. He did not know that there would be a time when people would die if they didn’t stop reproducing. In Buddha’s time the whole world’s population was only two hundred million. I think Oregon’s population must be almost two hundred million now – that was the whole population of the world.
Buddha had no idea that his country would be almost eight hundred million people, otherwise he would not have talked nonsense. But we cannot criticize him: whatever he did, whatever he said was relevant in his time. One thing that he did do wrong is that he made a tradition, created laws and regulations for the future. That to me is dictatorial, not democratic. Who am I for the future? Right now I am alive: you can argue against me, you can decide against me, you can doubt my ideas, but when I am dead…
The whole emphasis of all the religions is to believe, to have faith; so people go on believing and having faith in ideas which are simply out of date, which are dangerous to believe in. For example, Buddha preached celibacy. Now, celibacy is absolutely unnatural. Perhaps at the age of eighty-two he may have been celibate – in fact, what else are you going to do at the age of eighty-two?
Osho,
Do you have a girlfriend?
I have many. You are welcome, there is no trouble in it. I don’t think anybody has as many girlfriends as I have – thousands!
Thousands!
I am against celibacy. It may be good for an impotent person; it may do some good for him – at least a consolation that he is celibate. But impotence is rare, and impotence is a sickness. The impotent person has never done anything worthwhile. He has never created anything; he has not even been able to become a saint, which would have been the easiest thing for him to do.
Buddha and others talking about celibacy have created sexual perversion throughout the world. Now there are homosexuals and there are lesbians and there are people who are making love to animals and there are all kinds of perversions. And for all these perversions, who is responsible? – those people who talked about celibacy.
When I said to the Indian masses that celibacy should be condemned as a crime because it goes against nature… You can go to any medical college, you can go to any medical board and ask them, but such is the ignorance that even doctors try to be celibate – particularly in India, where celibacy seems to be a great spiritual thing.
Even doctors – even they cannot understand that it is something natural to your physiology, your chemistry, your biology. Your body does not understand that you have taken a vow of celibacy. There is no way to convey the message to the body, the body will go on in the same way.
You may be Hindu, you may be Christian, you may be Mohammedan; it doesn’t make any difference, you will all feel hunger. The body knows nothing about you being a Mohammedan and this is the month of Ramadan, the sacred month when one should not eat in the day. The body feels hungry. There is no way to communicate the idea that in the month of Ramadan, for the whole month a Mohammedan cannot eat in the day, he can eat only in the night.
At least Mohammedanism allows eating in the night. So people eat as much as they can in the night. And they eat again early in the morning before sunrise, so that they don’t feel hungry the whole day. This is just unnecessarily disturbing people. The whole night they could not sleep, they were just eating and eating and eating, preparing for the whole day, because in the day they will not be able to eat.
But there is a religion in India, Jainism. On its sacred days, ten days per year, you have to fast and you cannot eat in the night. According to Jainism you cannot eat in the night any day of the year: eating in the night is sin. When the sun sets, Jainas cannot eat. Not only that, but those who are very orthodox will not drink water.
It was such a trouble in my childhood, because I was born in a Jaina family. In India it is so hot, and summer nights are so hot, and you cannot even drink water. I simply refused. I said, “I am willing to go to hell – that will happen after death. There is time – I will do something. But right now I am going to drink. I don’t want to suffer this night in hell.”
In those ten days you cannot eat at all, for ten days continuously. And I know that in those ten days Jainas think only of food, nothing else. Day and night, their dreams are full of food.
You were asking about dreams. Jainas’ dreams in those ten days are full of food. Christian monks, Hindu monks, their dreams are full of sex. Whatever you repress in the day becomes your dream in the night. I don’t repress anything, that’s why there is no possibility of having a dream. My night is a dreamless silence.
You don't miss struggling or pain or anything?
There is none.
You don't miss it?
No problem. As far as I am concerned, there is nothing that I miss and I never repress anything. For example, I don’t think anybody would have said to you that you are welcome to be my girlfriend. I don’t think… But I don’t repress anything. The idea came to me, rather than seeing you in my dreams, I said it. I am finished with it. Now you cannot come in my dreams. My life is simple and open. Dreams are possible only if you repress. If you don’t repress, dreams disappear. And the disappearance of dreams is such a beautiful experience – the whole night is such a joy, such bliss.
In India, Mahatma Gandhi was doing exactly what the pope is doing now. He was telling people, “Go back.” In his ideology the spinning wheel is the ultimate invention of humanity, after that whatever has happened has to be dropped – in fact, everything has happened after it! The spinning wheel must have been invented two or three thousand years ago; everything of any value has happened afterwards. But in his ideology the spinning wheel is the full stop, and we have to go back to that stage.
These people don’t understand at all. How can you manage eight hundred million people just with a spinning wheel? I have calculated: if a person spins eight hours a day, then he can cover his whole body for the whole year. He can have his bed sheet, his blanket, his pillow covers – but eight hours every day will be needed. What about his wife, what about his children, what about his old parents, what about his sick mother? He can manage only for himself. And what about food? What about the other necessities of life? Just clothes are not enough, you cannot eat them. And if he is just spinning for eight hours, when is he going to earn his bread? When is he going to earn enough money for his mother dying of tuberculosis?
But Mahatma Gandhi has appeal because he is in tune with tradition. I am saying something which goes against their tradition. Gandhi says to people, “You need not worry; God takes care, he is compassionate,” and people are absolutely willing to accept the idea because that idea has been conditioned in their minds for thousands of years.
And when I say, “There is no God and nobody is taking care of you. You have to take care yourself,” it hurts them in two ways. First, they are not willing to drop their traditional idea of God. Fear arises. Secondly, to accept responsibility for everything needs guts. It is very easy to transfer to a father figure in heaven, “He will take care.” Even if there is nobody it does not matter, but you are consoled for the moment.
I am stirring your fear, your insecurity, your death. And there is nobody to take care. It is all empty, you have to find your own way. There are no super-highways made for you by others that you have simply to walk on.
Truth is something like a bird flying in the sky, which leaves no footprints behind. So if one person reaches truth you cannot follow him. He has not left any footprints in the sky. You can try to understand the man, you can try to imbibe his vibe. You can sit in silence with the man and let something transpire in silence. You can love the man, you can be open to the man so his love can flow toward you. Perhaps in these mysterious ways he may be able to take you by the hand into the unknown. Otherwise there is no road. He cannot say, “Just go five miles right, then turn to the left and you have arrived.” It is not that easy.
After trying with Indians for thirty years I decided that it was just futile. I dropped the whole idea. I started working only with those who are capable of understanding me. In 1970 I stopped traveling in India; for thirty years I had been traveling continuously. In 1970 I stopped traveling and began the movement of sannyas.
Osho,
And four years ago today you arrived on this ranch.
Four years ago I arrived here. In four years we have made this desert an oasis.
Yes.
Just go on coming, and every time you will find great changes happening continuously. When we had come there was only one house here, and that too dilapidated. Now we have houses for five thousand sannyasins, fully equipped with air-conditioning, everything. And this is against the government, against the people of Oregon, against all kinds of allegations, cases.
But we don’t bother: we go on fighting cases in the courts and we go on doing what we want to do. And we know that finally we are going to win and we are going to make these 126 square miles a lush, green place; a place that tourists from all over the world will be coming to see, because it will be so full of laughter and so full of love.
Well you have eighty-one thousand acres, here.
Yes.
That's a lot.
Eighty-four thousand acres – nobody else has that much land.
Yes, it's a lot. So you're rich and famous.
We are – and we are going to become richer and richer and more famous. Because of us, Oregon is now famous all over the world. This small commune, Rajneeshpuram, is the world capitol. We are going to make it a world capital. Every country is represented here, every race, every religion is represented here.
Lawyers, doctors…
Every profession, every kind of people – and all educated, all intelligent, so there is no need for me to think for their future. I just have to make their present as beautiful and as intense and total as possible, so that out of that totality and intensity their future will be born.
Osho,
Have you been to the university lately? – that place down the road?
No, I never go anywhere. People listen to me, and if they find something is valuable they take it to the university, they take it to the fields – to the commune, its work. But I never direct anybody in any way. I never give any instructions. I am available with all my vision, if you feel that it triggers something in you, do it. But you are doing your thing, not my thing. You are doing it because it has triggered your heart. You are following your heart, I am just accidental.
You are not to believe in me. You have to be just available to me, as I am available to you. And all these people here are not my followers. As far as I am concerned, they are all my friends, my lovers, my fellow travelers. So, whatsoever they can take and materialize, they go on doing. They are doing beautifully. I see the commune growing every day, becoming greener every day.
I will go on sharing my vision to my last breath. And now it is up to them. That’s why I said my sannyasins are my poems, my sannyasins are my music, my sannyasins are my paintings. My sannyasins are my future.
I need not bother about the future, it is already here. It is all around the world – one million sannyasins around the world, hundreds of communes around the world. And every commune trying to maintain exactly the same standards, the same comfort, the same food, the same luxury, the same medical facilities.
I want my communes to become a model to the whole world. I don’t want to argue with them – this is my argument. My commune is my argument: “Man can live so beautifully, so relaxedly, so creatively – why can’t you live like that?” Just because you have not tried, just because you are clinging to old ideas which are no longer workable.
You have to learn only one thing, and that is to be contemporary. Very few people are contemporary. Somebody is living two thousand years back, somebody three thousand years ago. A strange world, where you will not find contemporary people. And I can have appeal only to the contemporaries.
So I stopped going to the graveyards and talking to the graves and disturbing the dead. What is the need? Let them rest in peace. I have found my people, and they are coming in hundreds every day. And my appeal is only for the intelligent: the unintelligent simply cannot have any communication with me, my thing goes over his head. But he has his popes and bishops and churches – he can go there.
My whole effort is to make the intelligent people so tremendously significant that they cannot be ignored anymore; that the world has to take notice of them; that the world has to learn that there is something that they are missing and that these people have. So my argument is very existential – rather than talking philosophically to them, which I have done for thirty years. It does not make any sense.
Now I am trying to produce an existential proof that whatever I am saying is realizable. You can come and see that it is not just an ideology, not just a utopia, that it can be a factual reality.
Okay.

============================================================

James Conaway,
Washington Post, Washington, DC, United States

Glad to meet you.
Osho,
I'm interested in the public lands in the west, and would like to ask you some questions on that first. The United States government owns a vast amount of land in the west. Some of this land is within your domain here on the ranch. What do you think of the policies of the United States government with regard to land management?
The philosophy of democracy is totally against the idea of governments owning anything: land, schools, libraries, universities. That idea – that the government should own everything, that no individual should be the owner – is basically communist. It is a very subtle psychology to destroy the individual: if an individual’s ownership is taken away he becomes a beggar.
At least in America, the government should not own any land. That is part of a democratic approach. There should be no kind of nationalization on any level. All nationalization is communist. Every individual should be free in every possible way from government rule, government domination. The universities should not be owned, the schools, the colleges should not be owned. The government has no business interfering in people’s lives, their development, their intelligence. Each university should have its own individuality; each school should have its own individuality.
In a democracy the question of ownership does not arise; individuals should be the owners of everything that exists. The government is simply a functioning body. It is not the master, it is the servant of the people. It should see that everything is going well – that no individual is being exploited in any way, that no individual is being enslaved, that no individual is being interfered with.
The function of the government in a democracy is to protect the individual – his freedom, his ownership, his possibilities of growth – and to help him. The government should not become a partner, a competitor, in business, in land, in factories, in anything. The government is just a functional body like the post office. Now, should the post office start owning land and factories? Or the board that runs airplanes or railway lines? The government should not own anything, because that ownership makes the politician too powerful.
In Oregon almost half of the land is owned by the federal government. This is simply ugly, undemocratic. They wanted – particularly the vice-president was interested – to own the whole of Oregon. And the federal government is angry with us because they were interested in this land, too. And this is a big area, 126 square miles. But they were trying to give just a little bit of compensation, and the owner was not ready to take it. It was for sale for decades, and because we purchased it and gave the right price for it, the state government is angry, the federal government is angry. This is strange – it seems we are not living in America, we are in the Soviet Union.
Osho,
Your sentiments are similar to some of the conservative ranchers who live around here, since they also feel that the government shouldn't own land and should stay out of the lives of individuals. Considering that, and the fact that you have made this land here very productive in the last four years, why is it that so many people dislike you?
There are a thousand and one reasons. A man like me can only be disliked or liked but cannot be ignored. You either have to love me or you have to hate me, there is no third alternative.
The people of Oregon, particularly the neighbors close to this property, have reasons to be against me. First, their animal nature – every animal has a territorial imperative; we are strangers, the ordinary human mind always feels afraid of anything that is strange, unknown, unpredictable. We are not Christians, we don’t believe in any religion. We don’t believe in any God, we don’t believe in any heaven and hell. Our basic approach is that this life itself can be paradise, why bother about anything else? If there is a heaven we will enjoy it, if there is a hell we will transform it too.
This land was just a desert when we came here. Only one single house and that, too, dilapidated. We have made it an oasis – we have created dams, we have created lakes, we are creating a small river – we have made it green. Now there are fully scientifically equipped houses for five thousand sannyasins, all centrally air-conditioned. Never before in history has there been such a commune – creative, intelligent, independent. We have our own school, we have our own university, we have our own hospital. Naturally they are very jealous.
This land was lying here for fifty years. Nobody cared about it – and suddenly we come from outer space and change the whole side! And we live comfortably, we live luxuriously – because I am the first religious man who respects luxury, who respects money. I am not in favor of poverty: I do not want a single individual to be poor. But I am not against capitalism. I want capitalism to spread so much and create so much wealth that there is no need for anybody to be poor. I don’t want to distribute poverty equally; I want so much abundance that there is no need for hoarding.
They have been here for hundreds of years, for generations, and they have not been able to create anything. And within four years we have created a place which can compete with any city. In just four years we have created a place, against all hostility, against every hindrance from the government. We are fighting so many cases in the courts, but nothing is going to prevent us.
They are jealous, and jealousy turns into anger, turns into hostility. If they were a little intelligent they would have come here – but they won’t come. They should come and see what we have done. They can also do it. We are available to help them: we will welcome them, whatever we are doing here. We are self-sufficient in our food, our vegetables, our fruits, our milk products. They can be also – they have better land than we have.
This was completely a desert and we are bent on making it one of the most lush, green parts of the world. They can learn it too, but rather than coming here, rather than being friendly, they are trying in every way to destroy us. This is simply an animal attitude. It is nothing strange, it is expected. But they are being defeated in every court, and we are going to fight to the very end.
A very strange situation: we are fighting for the American constitution against the Americans, because the Americans are doing things which are against the American constitution. And I have always had respect for the American constitution. It is the only constitution in the whole world which has some hope for humanity and the Americans are destroying it in every possible way.
I had come here thinking that I was going to a country which is contemporary. It is not so. In India there was no problem: I knew it was an ancient, rotten, dead country. But America is so new, fresh, young. Has it gotten rotten within just three hundred years? Has it forgotten completely what it stands for?
It is disgusting to see President Ronald Reagan trying to enforce prayer in schools. Then why are you against communism? Then why not hand over the whole country to the Soviet Union? Why take on unnecessary troubles? This is against the constitution of America. Religion should not interfere in the state; the state should not interfere in religion. Trying to introduce prayer in every school, every educational institution, in colleges, universities, is a tremendous interference with freedom.
Just a few days ago I heard that a Boy Scout – who was one of the topmost, he had won many awards – was refused promotion because he said, “I do not believe in God.” Now, this is strange. What do Scouts have to do with God? And if an intelligent boy says, “I do not believe in God,” he is thrown out, he cannot be a member – it is something absolutely necessary that you believe in God. This is strange, absolutely strange!
Nobody can prove what God is. Nobody has ever been able to give any proof, any argument that is logical, rational, about God. It is simply a fiction, the greatest lie that man has invented. And you are trying to indoctrinate your children into lies?
Just now I heard that one of the most important Christian fundamentalists, Jerry Falwell, is trying to have the Bible recognized by the government, by the people, as infallible. And the Bible is such a rotten book! If the Supreme Court is fair, they will make the Bible x-rated. It is pornography, pure pornography. It is simply ugly. You can find everything that is ugly there: sodomy, people making love to animals, homosexuality, all kinds of perversions. And Jerry Falwell says every single word in the Bible is pure truth – even Adam and Eve are not fictions, not a story, but a historical fact.
Now, in the twentieth century, in the most developed, educated, literate, democratic country, such idiots have influence – tremendous influence – over people, over government, over the president, over the senators in the parliament. It hurts. It really gives me great sadness.
This man is saying that abortions should be illegal in a world which is already overpopulated, too overpopulated. Where one thousand people are dying every day in Ethiopia. Where fifty percent of Indians will soon be going into the same situation. Where the third world is all poor, undernourished. These people go on saying that abortion should be illegal. The pope is doing it in South Africa, where the birth rate is the highest in the world, and the people are so poor. He is propagating that birth control methods should not be used, they are against God.
But these people have a strange kind of God. This man Falwell is saying that homosexuality should be prohibited, that AIDS is a punishment from God for homosexuals. I am amazed. For the first time God seems to be in favor of women! Lesbians are not suffering from AIDS. For the first time, God is no longer a male chauvinist.
Why are you so concerned about AIDS?
I am concerned because it is going to destroy the whole of humanity. It is far more dangerous than your nuclear weapons because nuclear weapons may never be used – for the simple reason that it means global suicide, and nobody wants global suicide. A war is significant only when you can be victorious and somebody can be defeated. If in a war there is nobody who is victorious and nobody who is defeated, war has lost all meaning.
We are living in a postwar era. The Third World War will be continuously talked about, so that people can remain frightened and the politicians can go on doing whatever they want to do. But it is not going to happen. What is going to happen is AIDS, which is in fact a religious disease for which your God is responsible, your pope is responsible, Reverend Jerry Falwell is responsible, Billy Graham is responsible – because these are the people who have perverted the human mind.
Homosexuality was born in monasteries, because you are forcing men to live together without any women. There are monasteries where not a single woman has entered for one thousand years. And women have to be kept away in their nunneries, where men cannot enter. Now, you cannot go against nature. Your body does not know that you are a Catholic, that you are a fundamentalist Christian, that you are a Hindu or a Mohammedan. Your body knows nothing. The body does not know that you have taken a vow of celibacy. The body goes on producing blood, bones, sex energy. It knows nothing about celibacy.
God himself is not celibate. Not only that, he is a criminal: he made the poor Virgin Mary pregnant. And the whole company of God – God, the Holy Ghost, the Son – are all men. It is a gay company, a gay club. And if anybody should suffer from AIDS it is those three people. Or they may have died already, nobody has seen them for so long!
This man Falwell is saying that AIDS is a punishment for homosexuality. And homosexuality is created by religions all over the world, they are responsible for AIDS. The idea of celibacy is something that should be made criminal, because only impotence can be celibate. So let impotent people be celibate. How can a man who is really alive be celibate? In graves you can be celibate – be celibate! Nobody is bothering you.
But a living man, full of energy and life – sex is part of life. To cut off sex means to destroy life from the very roots. And to stop people from loving, to separate man and woman is against nature. AIDS is not a punishment from God, it is the responsibility of the religions and their priests. All those people should be immediately behind bars, because they are continuously trying to do the same. Still they are preaching celibacy and nobody can prove medically that celibacy is possible. There has never been anybody who was celibate; they were all hypocrites.
You cannot go against nature. If you try, then there will be perversions, and AIDS is the ultimate outcome of all kinds of perversions.
Wouldn't celibacy be one way of avoiding AIDS?
Celibacy cannot avoid AIDS, it has brought it. What are you going to do with your sex? Then the churches should start propagating masturbation. That seems to be the only safe method to get rid of sex energy. If celibacy is going to be the safeguard, then you will turn the whole of humanity into perverted people.
Then I would suggest to women to become lesbians: let men be celibate, let man be whatever he wants – homosexual, sodomist. Women, all women, should become lesbians. At least they should be protected from AIDS, one thing. And every hospital should start collecting semen from men who are still free of AIDS, so lesbians can be injected – artificial insemination for the future of humanity. These men who are celibate and perverts and Christian monks will all be going down the drain.
Osho,
This is ostensibly a Christian country. I am interested to know why you chose America and why you chose the American west.
I have not chosen anything in my life. It is America that has chosen me; it is this Wild West that has chosen me. America needs me, I don’t need America. And I am going to fight against all these idiots. I challenge them publicly to discuss with me. They go on talking nonsense to idiots and retarded Christians. They cannot prove God, they cannot prove that homosexuality is not the product of their monasteries, they cannot prove that Jesus was the son of a virgin woman, they cannot prove…
This man Falwell is saying that each single word, even the miracles described in the Bible – Jesus walking on water, raising the dead back to life – are historical facts. If this man was able to turn water into wine, why not turn the whole ocean? You know the secret – why turn only a bottle into wine? And in fact, a man who turns water into wine is a criminal. He is creating drugs. The real miracle will be that he should turn wine into water. That would be understandable. He is raising the dead, but in his life there must have been many dead people. He raised only one person, who was his personal friend. It all seems to be tricks, befooling people – that man was not dead, he was pretending to be dead.
Just think of the fact that not a single contemporary Jewish scripture even mentions the name of Jesus Christ. Do you think that a man who walks on water, a man who cures all kinds of diseases just by touch – the blind start seeing, the lame start running, the dead man becomes alive – do you think such a man will remain without being reported? If he is not news, then what can be news? But there is not a single reference in any Jewish book.
And he was a Jew, he was never a Christian. That you have to remember. He was born a Jew, he lived a Jew, he died a Jew. He had never heard the words Christ or Christian. Their boy was doing such great things and they crucified him! It does not make sense. They should have raised him up, they should have accepted him as their awaited messiah – that’s what he was trying to prove. But not a single rabbi became his disciple – strange.
All those twelve fools who became his apostles were illiterate, uneducated, poor men: fishermen, woodcutters, carpenters. Not a single rabbi could he manage, the man who was doing such great things. Even in the twentieth century, if anybody walks on water and raises the dead, all the presidents and all the prime ministers and all the queens and kings will be falling at his feet. He would have proved that he belongs directly to God, that he is the only begotten son of God.
But the Jews crucified him because he was just a pretender. And all these stories are invented. What has he said that seems to be so significant? It is all available in the Jewish scriptures. He was simply repeating them, not a single word is his own. And whatever he is saying is against humanity. Perhaps he himself was a homosexual. What was he doing with all those twelve fools hanging around him? Not a single woman! It is strange, really strange.
And it was not that women were not interested in him. In fact, when he was crucified all the disciples had escaped; those great apostles had all escaped fearing that they may be caught. Only one was there, and he also denied Jesus. He said, “I don’t know him, who he is. I am from far away and I have just come to visit the city. I don’t know him.”
When Jesus was brought down from the cross there were only three women there – not a single apostle. His mother was there; a prostitute, Mary Magdalene, was there; and another woman named Mary was there – all these three women whom he condemns badly. In the Christian trinity he could have made a place. What is the need for this Holy Ghost? What function, what purpose does he fulfill? It would have been perfectly right: father, mother, son. It would have looked more natural. But a woman could not be raised so high as to become part of the trinity.
These people – Jerry Falwell, Pope the Polack, Mother Teresa the Terrible – are all against humanity. They want abortion to be illegal; they want birth control methods to be illegal; they want the pill to be illegal, and the pill is the greatest revolution that man has known. The pill is the only thing that can make woman free from man’s slavery. But Falwell is saying that women should follow the Bible, which says the husband is the master, and woman’s only function is to produce children.
In twentieth century America, you tolerate these people! Can’t you make a cross for them? These people go on hanging golden crosses around their necks – why not give them a real cross? I am really surprised, because I had a tremendous respect for the democratic values of America, but I don’t see that they are being practiced.
Osho,
You have lived in the West now for several years. What does the American west mean to you?
I have not even gone out, my paradise is enough. I don’t bother about anything else – it does not mean anything to me. I have my people. I don’t want to get mixed up with the sad, miserable, suffering. Jesus says, “Blessed are those who mourn, because they shall be comforted.”
I say to my people, “You will never be comforted – remember – because you are not the people who mourn. You are rejoicing. So forget one thing at least: you will never be comforted. But you don’t need it.”
My people are rejoicing, dancing, singing, enjoying every moment to its fullest. And that is my approach: squeeze the juice from every moment, so that you never have to repent that that moment went away unlived. Don’t bother about the past and don’t bother about the future. The present is all there is, so live it totally. And they are living. I do not go out to see those long faces of the Oregonians. I love my people, I love their laughter. This is my world.
Osho,
How important do you think the use of the land is in terms of the development of human spirituality or society? Is it an important value?
It has tremendous importance. It is our mother, the earth. We may not see it, but we also have roots in the earth. We are walking trees; the earth supplies everything to us. I am against a God who is far away in heaven, but I am not against mother earth. We should enrich it. We should not disturb the balance of nature, which we have been doing for centuries. I am absolutely in favor of nature, its balance. We should not do anything that goes against it, because finally that goes against us. We are part of this earth.
So, land should be used respectfully, lovingly. Hence in my commune work is called “worship.” We have dropped the word work, we use the word worship. Working with the earth – farming, gardening – you are doing really religious work: enriching the earth, helping the earth to regain its lost resources. I am absolutely in favor of environmentalists, those who want to save the environment against the rape that man has done to his own mother. Everywhere the earth has been raped badly.
Something has to be done urgently because the earth is dying, and your religious leaders never talk about the real problems of life. Mahatma Gandhi in India was against any scientific developments that could help the land to regain its youth. No, he was in favor of the traditional methods. I cannot think that an intelligent person will talk such sheer nonsense. But all these people are really not religious, they are political. They are saying what the masses want to hear.
The masses want to hear that their tradition is right, that their past is golden. It is not so. Neither was the past golden nor their traditions are right. None of their ideas about land, manure, production, creativity – nothing is right. This whole humanity is a proof that all your conventions and all your traditions have failed. And man is suffering because of your stupidity, that you go on clinging to those ideas.
You will be surprised to know that Gandhi was against simple things like the telephone, railway trains, motorcars. He was against anything that was invented after the spinning wheel. The spinning wheel must have been invented some two or three thousand years ago. In fact, everything that has any value has happened since. Only one thing can conceivably be put before the spinning wheel, and that is the bullock cart. For Mahatma Gandhi those two things are the greatest inventions.
And it was perfectly okay when the whole population of the world – just twenty-five centuries back, in Buddha’s time – was only two hundred million people, the whole earth. Now just India, without Pakistan, without Bangladesh, is eight hundred thousand million. These people cannot live just on the spinning wheel. You will have to spin for eight hours just to provide enough clothes for yourself. What about your wife, what about your children, what about your old mother, what about your sick father? And can man live by clothes alone?
Jesus says man cannot live by bread alone. Can he live without bread? – the other part is not bothered about at all! I accept the idea that man should have better values, higher values than just eating, drinking. It is good, “Man cannot live by bread alone,” but don’t forget that without bread man cannot live at all.
Man can live without everything, but not without bread. He can live without music, without spirituality, without poetry, without painting, but he cannot live without bread. And if eight hours a day he is just spinning clothes for himself, when is he going to earn bread? When is he going to earn enough money for his old father, his medicine? When is he going to earn money to make a shelter to live in? He cannot live under the spinning wheel.
But Gandhi had a tremendous appeal because he supported – he was against birth control, he was against abortion. Strangely, all the religions which differ in their ideologies, in their philosophies are in a subtle, unconscious conspiracy as far as humanity, its growth, its future, is concerned. Ayatollah Khomeini, Mahatma Gandhi, the pope, Falwell, they may differ in their theology – they do differ – but they don’t differ about fundamental things which can make human life rich, which can make human life comfortable, which can make humanity rich, affluent.
We have the resources now. Science has discovered so much, but we are forcing the scientists into the service of death rather than the service of life. The same energy – and it is not a small part, almost seventy-five percent of the income of all the nations goes into creating more weapons, armies and other things necessary for war. People are living on only twenty-five percent of their productivity.
There is no need for war. There is no need for nuclear weapons. You already have more – seven hundred times more – than are needed to destroy this earth. Now, this is sheer madness. You go on piling them up – for what? These people have to be stopped, and these religious people have to be brought to their senses.
But are you in favor of advanced technology? You seem to be.
I am. I am in favor of technology – but in a technology which does not go against life, does not go against humanity, does not go against the environment. Technology is in our hands: it can destroy, it can create. Technology itself has no value system; we provide the values. I am not against technology. It is like a sword: you can kill a person or you can save a woman from being raped – the same sword. It is neutral, all power is neutral.
So the question is not of technology, the question is of the people who are going to decide the value system. Now, people like Ronald Reagan, who belong to the fundamentalist Christian stupidity, cannot be the right people to decide. Falwell cannot be the right person to decide. To decide exactly what technology should do should be not in the hands of the politicians, who are in turn in the hands of the priests because they have the power of the people, their votes. So it is simply a conspiracy between the politicians and the priests to keep humanity starved, hungry; to keep humanity in such a state that it cannot rebel against the vested interests.
Osho,
Do you worry about statements that you make about American politicians and about the local controversies regarding land use endangering the ranch here?
We have invited those people who are talking about land use laws to come here: “For 50 years the land was lying dead. You never raised the question that 126 square miles of land is lying dead.” Not a single politician bothered about it. Those “One Thousand Enemies of Oregon” – they did not bother. We have made it productive. We have been inviting the governor, the United States attorney and these people seem such cowards, they won’t come here.
“Just come and see how we have used the land. If it goes against your laws, then change the laws, because man is not made for laws, laws are made for man. Just see if we have misused the land in any way. And if we have, we are ready to correct it, we are willing in every way to change it.” But they don’t come.
Just a few days ago – this incident will help you to understand the situation – we had a festival and we created a new kind of tent, winterized so that people don’t have to suffer in the cold. Immediately the United States attorney imposed a fine of six hundred thousand dollars because we had not taken permission, and, “Your tents are not tents but permanent structures.” We asked them to come and see if they are permanent structures. Nobody ever came to see. They had already decided that we had to pay that much money as punishment. We had to go to the court.
I said to my people, “Take a tent and, there in the court, within ten minutes you can put up the tent. And in ten minutes you can unfold it again and put it back in the truck. And just tell the judge, ‘Is that not enough proof that it is not a permanent structure? We don’t want to argue anything; the tent itself is the argument.’” And the judge was certainly an intelligent man. He immediately dismissed the whole punishment and declared, “These are tents. You cannot create permanent structures in ten minutes!”
And the attorney has no shame even – just a shameless fellow with no dignity. He should have resigned immediately. He cannot even understand what indignity he has suffered. He should just go and jump into the ocean, forget all about it. We were inviting him here, and he would have been saved from this indignity. Now he has put a case against the city, saying that it is illegal because religion and the government – the state – are mixed here. Strange people. They don’t come – they should come and show us where religion is mixing with state.
Your president is trying to mix state and religion. Your courts are mixing state and religion: why are Bibles provided to take the oath on? Why has a Scout been thrown out because he does not believe in God? And now this man, Jerry Falwell, is saying that the Bible should become a national, government-approved scripture, each single word is true. And he has immense power over politicians: he is a friend of Ronald Reagan, he goes to see him. And they both belong to the same company.
And this city is under litigation. This is a unique city in the whole world – an illegal city! Either there is a city or there is no city, but an illegal city is a rare phenomenon. And that, too, when in four years – the time we have been here – not a single crime has happened. No rape has happened, no theft has happened, no murder has happened, no suicide has happened. And we are the illegal city! You should declare New York, San Francisco, illegal cities, because everything illegal is happening there every moment.
Such an innocent city, where nobody is doing any harm to anybody, is illegal. And the people who decide it don’t come here, because they know they cannot encounter and face the reality. But we are going to prove that the whole of America may be illegal, but this city is not.
Osho,
What would you eventually like to create here?
We would like to create as big an oasis as possible – a model for the whole world. We would like people to know that crimes are not needed, rapes are not needed, prostitution is not needed, politicians are not needed. We are living with such psychological health. If somebody commits a mistake – which is human – it is not a sin, he should be encouraged to learn from his mistake. If he goes on committing the same mistake, then we have all kinds of therapies in the university. We send the person to the university; that now it is for the world of the psychologists, psychoanalysts, psychiatrists, to change this man’s conditioning.
No, we don’t have any jail here – our police we call “the Peace Force,” and they have no work. They must be getting bored holding their guns the whole day for four years. Nothing happens. Their guns are not needed, and I don’t think they will ever be needed. We would like to create a model. I don’t believe in arguments, I believe in existential proofs. Rather than convincing by arguing, I would like…
And this is not the only commune, we have hundreds of communes around the world on the same pattern. We are trying in every way to prove that people can live so happily, so blissfully, so lovingly, that there is no need for anybody to murder, to commit suicide, to become homosexual, to suffer from this ugly disease AIDS.
All my sannyasins around the world have gone through the test for AIDS. I said, “All immediately go for the test.” In this commune we have found two persons with AIDS. That does not mean they have lost our respect. They have gained more respect and more love, because they are victims of the whole past of the religions. We have made the best houses available to them, the most scenic place. And because they are not going to live more than two years at the most, we are providing them with everything we can: all our love, all our respect. They are not reduced the way they would be in the outside world.
In the outside world a person does not want to go through the test, because if it is found that he has AIDS, even his family – his wife who was ready to die for him, his father, his mother, even his children – will close the door and tell him, “Get lost. You don’t belong to us.” His friends will become enemies. He will lose his job. He cannot live. If it is known that he has AIDS, the only way out for him will be suicide.
But in my commune they are living more beautifully than any other sannyasin. And we have given them meditations. They can meditate, they can study, they can paint – whatever they want to do. Whatever they always wanted to do but could never get time. Now they have two years, two whole years.
This is too much: do everything that you wanted to do. And meditate as deeply as possible, because if your death comes and you are able to meditate while death is coming, that is the greatest experience in the world. Death comes to the body, to the brain, but not to you. You can go on watching death, step by step. It has taken your body, it has taken your brain, it has taken your heart, but you are still the same. At the very center of your being is something which is eternal.
And these two years – they are fortunate: good fortune has come disguised as AIDS. Otherwise, how to get two years time just to meditate and do nothing? I have every certainty they will die a beautiful death. The other religions have given them the disease, we are going to give them rejoicing, even in death. And nobody can spread it here because nobody can be part of the commune unless he goes through the test.
The disease is really such that very drastic steps have to be taken. For example, kissing can give it to you, tears can give it to you. So I have told my people, “Stop kissing.” Anyway it is a very unhygienic procedure. I don’t see that it has anything to do with love. Just mixing your saliva, tongues playing in each other’s mouths – it is simply insane. And we can find better, more scientific, more hygienic methods.
Eskimos have never kissed, so it is not anything unnatural. I know in India there are aboriginal tribes who have never kissed. In fact, when they first found Christian missionaries kissing, they could not believe it: “These idiots, what are they doing?” Even aboriginals who are five thousand years behind could not believe: “These idiots have come to teach us, and they don’t know what they are doing.” Rather than kissing, Eskimos rub their noses, which is far more hygienic. In India the most ancient book on sexology prescribes playing with each other’s earlobes; they are very erotic. So we can find ways, there is no problem. Just a little intelligence is needed.
Never wipe anybody’s tears. In fact in my commune it doesn’t happen: nobody is crying and weeping and screaming – the whole scene that is happening in every family. It is not a family. But even if somebody is crying – perhaps tears may come out of joy – don’t allow those tears to be touched by anybody.
Sex is also unhygienic.
It is. But it can be made hygienic, and we have made it. I don’t believe in theories: if I see something is right, I tell my people to do it. While making love they should use condoms, while making love they should use gloves. And they are freely available to everybody.
This is simple intelligence. Why do unnecessary harm to the person you love?
You're a sensual man…
Certainly.
Rubber gloves and condoms detract from sensuality.
No, they do not. If you are really sensuous, they also become sensuous. Otherwise your skin would destroy your sensuality. What is your skin? It is just a rubber glove! Do you want the woman to be really naked, all skin taken away? Then you will make love? If you can make love through the skin, what is wrong with plastic or rubber over your hand? It is just new, and in fact everything new is an adventure.
I am a sensuous man and I appreciate sensuality. But my understanding is that a sensuous man can touch anything and make it sensuous. A non-sensuous man or anti-sensuous man…
And you may have observed, sometimes you shake hands with a man and you feel as if you are shaking hands with a dead branch of a tree. That man is not there. He is simply fulfilling a mannerism. There is no warmth coming from him, in fact you will feel sucked. By being with this man you will feel tired. You will feel as if that man was somehow a parasite on your energy.
So it is not a question, you can make anything sensuous. And when life is in danger you have to find a way – because what will you do if life disappears? Then where will your sensuality be? And where will your sexuality be? It is a simple matter of intelligence.
Osho,
What is going to happen to this community when you are gone?
I never think about the future – because my idea is that anybody who tries to make arrangements for when he is gone is a criminal, because he wants to rule even when he is dead.
Jesus says, “I am the only begotten son of God, so don’t listen to anybody else. Only I am the savior, nobody else can save you.” So even when he is dead he is dominating half of humanity. Dead people controlling, dominating living beings, intelligent beings!
Manu wrote the moral code for the Hindus five thousand years ago. They are still following it. In five thousand years everything has changed. That code is absolutely rotten; it should be burned, but it is being followed. The older a scripture, the more valuable it becomes. So every religion tries to prove that their scripture is the oldest. The ancient-ness of the scripture should really be against the scripture; the more ancient it is, the more worthless it is. Is man evolving or falling down? We have evolved in every way and we should use every method.
Of course, Manu cannot be aware of it, neither can Jesus be aware of it, nor can Buddha be aware of it. Still they have tried to dominate the future. I find it disgusting. I don’t want to dominate even now when I am alive. I simply express myself and leave it to my people to decide on their own. I never go to the commune’s office, I never go to the commune’s meetings; I am not even a member. It is up to them. I share heart-to-heart what I feel in a certain situation, then they are free. Then I never even ask whether they have done anything about it or not. That is not my business. Who am I? Why should I dominate anybody? That is degrading the other person, reducing his humanity.
And you are asking me: “…after your death”? I am not going to have any successor, because popes have done so much harm in two thousand years. I am not going to create another line of popes, no. I am sharing my awareness with my people. That awareness will take care.
My whole effort is to make them more alert, more intelligent, so that they live through their intelligence. They are functioning right now without me, so in the future they will be able. I don’t even know the roads of the commune, I have only my own road where I go for driving. Twenty-three hours it remains in meditation – only for one hour I disturb it, otherwise there is no traffic.
My people are already living on their own. And my idea is that before I leave them I should become almost absent. So there will be no problem at all – my death will not create a problem for them. I was already absent for many years before death, and they were managing perfectly well. They will manage perfectly well after.
For three and a half years I was silent, I was not speaking. They managed perfectly well, everything went absolutely right. It was tremendously joyful for me to see that while I was silent and they could not get any instruction from me, they had the whole responsibility. They could not dump responsibility on me, and they did so beautifully.
It was just because they did beautifully during my silence that I started speaking again. Now there is no problem: they are not dependent on my speaking or not speaking, so they will not be dependent even on my presence. My absence or presence will not make any difference.
The people who appoint their successors, who give instructions, who make Ten Commandments, are really not the right kind of people. They are trying to dominate humanity through their graves. I am not interested in dominating a single individual. My whole effort is to make every individual totally responsible for himself.
Osho,
Let me ask you a question about the present: why do you like Rolls Royces so much?
I have tried all kinds of cars; and even Rolls Royce has many types and I have tried them too. Their best is the Corniche, but it doesn’t suit me. It is a question of my back. I need a certain kind of chair – I use only this chair. It has been made by my sannyasins exactly to give support to my back, because doctors have said that they cannot do anything more.
Experts from England were called to India. They tried hard, but they said, “It is impossible. You will have to live with it.” It was just a coincidence that one of the models of Rolls Royce, Silver Spur, suited me. The driver’s seat in that car fits perfectly, gives me no trouble. Naturally, my people love…
They don’t belong to me, those cars – nothing belongs to me. I am the poorest man in the whole world, living the richest life possible. My people love me, they want to do something for me. All those cars belong to the commune; they have made them available to me for one hour each day. I don’t know which car they are bringing, but one thing is certain, that I can be comfortable only in a Silver Spur. And they love me so much that they are trying to have 365 Rolls Royces, one for every day. And I say, why not, a great idea!
They make everything for me: this chair, my shoes, my robes, my hats, even my watch – they make everything for me. And because they make everything with so much love, so much feeling, I can feel the robe is not just the cloth. That’s why I said I am certainly a sensuous man. Wearing this robe I can feel my sannyasins, their love for me. Wearing this watch I can feel the person who worked hard on it. He did not know how to make watches. He went to Switzerland to learn, and now two of my sannyasins can defeat any watchmaker in the world.
The same watch from Piaget – exactly the same watch – is a quarter of a million dollars. My sannyasins have made it, not with diamonds but with real authentic stones. In that way it has no price, it is just the cheapest watch possible. In another way it is priceless. If somebody offers me one billion dollars for it, I am not going to give it to them. Love is never for sale.
They have arranged 90 Rolls Royces, and I know they will be able to manage 365.
Osho,
If you sold two or three Rolls Royces, you could build another lake with the money.
They will make the lake too – there is no need to sell the Rolls Royces. They will never sell them. Even when I am gone, those Rolls Royces are not going to be sold. I have used them; they will feel my presence in them. They will not want anybody else to sit in those cars. Those cars are not saleable. And as far as lakes are concerned, they are doing whatever is needed.
We have made a great lake, and now we are thinking to double it. Two and a half million dollars worth of lake, and we are now planning to double it. Already it is great, but when it enters deeper into the mountains it will be more scenic for boats, for people to go deep into the mountains. We are making everything.
As far as money is concerned, it is not a problem. We can create it. All my communes around the world are living richly. You can see it here: not only that I have ninety Rolls Royces, my other sannyasins have Rolls Royces, they have Mercedes Benzes. There are hundreds of cars. There are only fifteen hundred permanent residents here, and I don’t think any city in the whole world can compete as far as cars are concerned. Fifteen hundred people have one hundred busses. Fifteen hundred people have five airplanes and their own airport. And everybody can have any kind of vehicle he wants anytime, because we have made a pool of the vehicles.
For example, in Jesus Grove where we are sitting, they have a pool of hundreds of cars. Anybody can take any car, everything belongs to all; just out of their love, they will not take my cars. Nobody has prohibited them – I have not prohibited them. Just out of love, out of gratitude, they will not take them. Otherwise, those ninety cars are always available, they can take them. What can I do with ninety Rolls Royces? I drive only for one hour; I cannot drive ninety cars in one hour. They also know it, but they feel how much love I have given to them.
I have given my whole heart to them, so they want to do something. They try to do anything they can. And it is not a duty on them – nobody has asked them, nobody is forcing them. It is out of sheer joy that they go on doing things. And that’s the way it should be.
I don’t even say that I am your leader or your master. I simply say I am just a friend. If my experience can be of any help to you, I am ready to share.
Okay?