---
title: The Osho Upanishad 01
series: The Osho Upanishad 01-44
talk_number: 1
url: https://oshoworld.com/the-osho-upanishad-01
language: English
duration: 01:35:26
author: THE WORLD TOUR
scraped_at: 2026-01-03T09:31:31.502568+00:00
---
Osho,
Could you please explain exactly what the work of the mystery school is?
My beloved ones…
You are blessed to be here today, because we are starting a new series of talks between the master and the disciple.
It is not only a birth of a new book, it is also a declaration of a new phase. Today, this moment: 7:00 p.m., Saturday, the sixteenth of August of the year 1986 – one day this moment will be remembered as a historical moment, and you are blessed because you are participating in it. You are creating it; without you it cannot happen.
Books can be written, can be dictated to a machine, but what I am going to start is totally different. It is an upanishad.
Long forgotten, one of the most beautiful words in any language, a very living word, upanishad means sitting at the feet of the master. It says nothing more: just to be in the presence of the master, just to allow him to take you in, in his own light, in his own blissfulness, in his own world.
And that’s exactly the work of a mystery school.
The master has got it. The disciple also has got it, but the master knows and the disciple is fast asleep. The whole work of a mystery school is in how to bring consciousness to the disciple, how to wake him up, how to allow him to be himself, because the whole world is trying to make him somebody else.
There, nobody is interested in you, in your potential, in your reality, in your being. Everybody has his own vested interest, even those who love you. Don’t be angry at them; they are as much victims as you are. They are as unconscious as you are. They think what they are doing is love; what they are really doing is destructive. And love can never be destructive.
Either love is or is not. But love brings with it all possibilities of creativity, all dimensions of creativity. It brings with it freedom, and the greatest freedom in the world is that a person should be allowed to be himself.
But neither the parents nor the neighbors nor the educational system nor the church nor the political leadership – nobody wants you to be yourself because that is the most dangerous thing for them. People who are themselves cannot be enslaved. They have tasted freedom, you cannot drag them back into slavery.
So it is better not to allow them to taste freedom, their own being, their potential, their possibility, their future, their genius. Their whole life they will grope in darkness, asking for guidance from other blind people, asking for answers from those who know nothing about existence, who know nothing about themselves. But they are pretenders – they are called leaders, preachers, saints, mahatmas. They themselves don’t know who they are. But these cunning people are all around, exploiting the simple, the innocent, poisoning their minds with beliefs of which they themselves are not certain.
The function of a mystery school is that the master – speaking or in silence, looking at you or making a gesture, or just sitting with closed eyes – manages to create a certain field of energy. And if you are receptive, if you are available, if you are ready to go on the journey of the unknown, something clicks and you are no longer the old person.
You have seen something which before you had only heard about – and hearing about it does not create conviction but creates doubt, because it is so mysterious. It is not logical, it is not rational, it is not intellectual. But once you have seen it, once you have been showered by the energy of the master, a new being is born. Your old life is finished.
There is a beautiful story:

A great king, Prasenjita, had come to see Gautam Buddha. And while they were conversing, just in the middle, an old Buddhist sannyasin – he must have been seventy-five years old – came to touch the feet of Gautam Buddha. He said, “Please forgive me. I should not interrupt the dialogue that is going on between you two, but my time… I have to reach the other village before sunset. If I don’t start now I will not be able to reach there.” The Buddhist monks don’t travel at night.
“And I could not go without touching your feet because one knows nothing about tomorrow; whether I will be able to again touch your feet or not is uncertain. This may be the last time. So please, both forgive me. I will not delay your conversation.”
Gautam Buddha said, “Just one question: how old are you?” Strange, out of context.
And the man said, “I am not very old – just four years.”
King Prasenjita could not believe it – a seventy-five year old man cannot be four years old! He might be seventy, he might be eighty, there is no problem. It is difficult to judge; different people grow old at a different pace. But four years old is too much! In four years, nobody can grow to be seventy-five years old.
Buddha said, “Go with my blessings.”
Prasenjita said, “You have created a problem for me by asking an unnecessary question. Do you think this man is four years old?”
Buddha said, “Now I will explain it to you. It was not unnecessary, it was not without a proper context. It was for you that I was asking him – really I was creating a question in you – because you were talking nonsense. You were asking stupid questions. I wanted some relevant question to come out of you.
“Now, this is relevant. Yes, he is four years old because our way of counting age is from the day a person allows the master, allows his total being to be transformed, not holding back anything. His seventy-one years were simply a wastage; he has lived only four years. And I think you will understand that your sixty years have been sheer wastage unless you are reborn. And there is only one way to be reborn, and that is to come in contact, in deep communion with someone who has arrived. Then the real life begins.”

A mystery school teaches how to live. Its whole science is the art of living. Naturally it includes many things – life is multi-dimensional. But you must understand the first step: being totally receptive, open.
People are like closed houses – you cannot find even a single window open, no fresh breeze passes through those houses. Roses are standing outside but cannot release their fragrance into the house. The sun comes every day, knocks on the doors, and goes back; the doors are absolutely deaf. They are not available for fresh air, they are not available for fresh rays, they are not available for fresh perfumes, they are not available for anything. They are not houses, they are graves.
An upanishad contains in itself the whole philosophy of a school of mystery.
The upanishads don’t belong to Hindus; they don’t belong to any other religion either. The upanishads are the outpourings of absolutely individual realized beings to the disciples. There are four steps to be understood.
First, the student: he comes to a master but never reaches a master; he reaches only a teacher. It may be the same man – but the student is not there to be transformed, to be reborn, he is there to learn a little more knowledge. He wants to become a little more knowledgeable. He has questions but those questions are just intellectual, they are not existential. They are not his life concern, it is not a question of life and death. This type of person may go from one master to another master, collecting words, theories, systems, philosophies. He may become very proficient, he may become a great pundit, but he knows nothing.
This is something to be understood. There is a knowledge: you can have as much as you want, yet you will remain ignorant. And there is an ignorance which is really innocence: you do not know anything, but still you have come to the place where everything is known. So there is a knowledge which is ignorant, and an ignorance which is wisdom.
The student is interested in knowledge. But sometimes it happens: you may come to a master as a student, just out of curiosity, and you may be caught in his charisma, you may be caught by his eyes, you may be caught by his heartbeat. You had come as a student but you are turning to the second stage – you are becoming a disciple.
The student unnecessarily goes from one place to another place, from one scripture to another scripture. He collects much, but it is all garbage. Once he comes out of the cocoon of studentship and becomes a disciple, then the wandering stops; he is getting in tune with the master. He is being transformed without his knowing. He will know only later on that things are changing. The same situations that he had faced in the past he faces now with a totally different response.
Doubts are disappearing, rationality seems to be a child’s game. Life is much more, so much more that it cannot be contained in words. As he becomes a disciple he starts hearing something which is not said – between the words, between the sentences, in the pauses when the master suddenly stops but the communication continues.
A disciple is a great improvement upon the student.
In the past, in the days of the Upanishads, those mystery schools that existed in India were called gurukuls. A significant word – it means “the family of the master.” It is not an ordinary school, a college or a university. It is not a question of just learning; it is a question of being in love. You are not supposed to be in love with your university teacher. But in a gurukul, where the Upanishads flowered, it was a family of love. The question of learning was secondary, the question of being was important. How much you know is not the point; how much you are is the point. And the master is not interested in feeding your bio-computer, the mind. He is not going to increase your memory because that is of no use; that can be done by a machine, and the machine can do it better than you.

I have heard about a computer. The computer was fed with all kinds of astrological knowledge. And the scientist who worked on the computer for years, filling it with all the possible knowledge of astrology, naturally wanted to ask the first question himself, and he wanted to ask a question which was really difficult.
Apparently it was a simple question: he asked the computer, “Now you are ready. Can you tell me where my father is?”
The computer said, “It is better if you don’t know.”
He said, “What? Why should it be better if I don’t know?”
The computer said, “Don’t insist. But if you want to know, it is not my problem. Your father has gone fishing.”
The man said, “Nonsense. My father has been dead for three years. So my whole work is wasted!”
And the computer laughed. It said, “Don’t be sad, your work is not lost. The man who died three years ago was not your father. Go and ask your mother! Your father has gone fishing, he must be coming back. He is your neighbor.”

But even a computer can do things which the human memory can’t do. A single computer can contain a whole library. There is no need for you to read; you can just ask the computer and it will give the answer. And it is only very rarely that things will go wrong – if the electricity goes off or the battery runs down.
The master is not interested in making you into a computer. His interest is in making you a light unto yourself, an authentic being, an immortal being – not just knowledge, not what others have said, but your experience.
As the disciple comes closer and closer to the master, there comes another point of transformation – the disciple becomes, at one point, a devotee. There is a beauty in all these steps.
To become a disciple was a great revolution, but nothing compared with becoming a devotee. At what point does the disciple turn and become a devotee? He is nourished so much by the energy of the master, by his light, by his love, by his laughter, just by his sheer presence – and he cannot give anything in return. There is nothing that he can give in return. A moment comes when he starts feeling so immensely grateful that he simply bows down his head to the feet of the master. He has nothing else to give except himself. From that moment he is almost a part of the master, he is in a deep synchronicity with the heart of the master. This is gratitude, gratefulness.
And the fourth stage is that he becomes one with the master.

There is a story about Rinzai. He was living with his master for almost twenty years, and one day he came and sat in the seat of the master. The master came; he looked at Rinzai sitting in his seat. He simply went and sat where Rinzai used to sit. Nothing was said, but everything was understood. Everybody was puzzled – “What is happening?”
Finally Rinzai said to the master, “Are you not offended? Have I insulted you? Have I shown ungratefulness in any way?”
The master laughed. He said, “Now you have become a master. You have come home; from the student to disciplehood, from disciplehood to devotion, and from devotion to mastery. I am immensely pleased that now you can share my work. Now I need not come every day; I know somebody else is there with the same aura, with the same perfume.
“In fact you have been very lazy. This should have happened three months ago; you cannot deceive me. For three months I have been feeling that this man is unnecessarily holding my feet – he can sit on the seat, and for a change I can hold his feet. It took three months for you to gather courage.”
Rinzai said, “My God, I was thinking nobody knew about it, that it was just inside me. And you are giving me the exact date of when it started. Yes, it has been three months. I have been lazy and I have not been courageous enough. I was always thinking ‘This is not right, it doesn’t look right.’”
The master said, “If you had waited one more day I was going to hit you on your head. Three months is enough time to decide, and you were not deciding. And existence has decided.”

An upanishad is a mystery school. And we are entering into an upanishad today.
I was a teacher in the university. I left the university for the simple reason that it stops at the first step. No university requires you to become a disciple; the question of being a devotee or a master simply does not arise. And there are temples which, without making you a student or a disciple, simply enforce devotion on you – which is going to be false, without roots. And there are devotees in churches all over the world, in synagogues, in temples: not knowing anything about disciplehood, they have become disciples, they have become devotees.
A mystery school is a very systematic encounter with the miraculous. And the miraculous is all around you, both within and without. Just a system is needed. The master simply provides a system to enter slowly into deeper waters, and ultimately to enter a stage where you disappear into the ocean; you become the ocean itself.

Osho,
If the search is to know who I am, I must be taking a wrong turn. Through witnessing, I am losing all the ways I had of defining myself: I'm not what I do, I'm not the personality who does them. I feel as if I know less and less who I am; I don't seem to have a permanent face anymore. I feel more like a cloud – spacious and light – than anything else. Would you please say something?
It is not a wrong turn. You are on the right path. Your personality, your actions, your thoughts, your mind, your emotions – none of them is your reality. So naturally one who goes in search of himself finds himself in this strange position, that every day he becomes less and less instead of becoming more and more.
The logical mind says, “What are you doing? You have been searching for yourself and all that is happening is that you are losing all those things that you used to think were yourself. You must be taking a wrong turn. Come back! The old way was better. You could collect more thoughts and become more. You could cultivate a better personality, more polished. You could rise in the world of ambitions and you would have been something – a president, a prime minister, a celebrity.” That seems to be the right path to the logical mind.
But remember, the logical mind is continually going to deprive you of the right direction. The right direction is bound to be that you will become less and less, because all that is false will be understood as false. A moment will come when you will know that everything is false. You are just a witness, at the most, a point of witnessing. But this is only half the journey.
Before knowing the truth, one has to know the false – because we live in the false. So we have to know it, we have to drop it, and we have to be empty of the false, utterly empty, so that the truth of our being can fill the space. There will be a gap, a very small gap, but it will look like eternity.
When the false leaves you and the real comes in there is a little gap, a fragment of a second. But because of the emptiness it looks as if eternity has passed. And those are the moments when the master, when the family of the master, can be of immense help. Just the presence of the master is enough proof: “Don’t get frustrated. Learn to wait and learn to be patient. If it can happen to one man, it can happen to all.”
And the family will provide every support, because each one of them will be at a different stage. Somebody will be in just the same position as you are; somebody may have passed beyond it, and just holding his hand you will feel the warmth, the love, the compassion. Just being in the school – which is full of the presence of the master – will give you courage.
It was not without purpose that mystery schools were opened. The reason was that alone the journey becomes very arduous at many points.
I am reminded of a story of Gautam Buddha:

He is traveling with his disciple, Ananda. They are tired. They want to reach the next town before sunset; they are rushing as fast as possible. But Buddha has become old, and Ananda himself is older than Buddha. They are worried that perhaps they will have to stay in the forest for the night, they will not be able to reach to the nearby town.
They ask an old man, a farmer who is working in his field, “How far is the town?”
And the old man says, “Not very far. Don’t be worried. It is just two miles, at the most. You will reach.” Buddha smiles. The old man smiles.
Ananda could not understand: “What is going on?”
Two miles have passed. There is no town yet, and they are more tired. An old woman is collecting wood and Ananda asks her, “How far is the village?”
And she says, “Not more than two miles. You have nearly reached, don’t be worried.” Buddha laughs. The old woman laughs.
And Ananda looks at both: “What is this laughter?”
And after two miles still there is no town. They ask a third man, and again the same question and the same situation. And Ananda drops his bag and he says, “I am not going to move anymore. I am so tired. And it seems we are never going to cross these two miles. Three times we believed, but one question arises in my mind continually…”
Living with Buddha for forty years – he has learned how to live with such a man, not to ask him unnecessary questions. But he said, “Now if it is unnecessary or necessary, I don’t care. One thing you have to tell me – why were you laughing when that old man said, ‘Two miles, just two miles – you have not to go more than that’? And again you laughed with that old woman, and she also smiled, and again with the third person the same thing happened. What was this laughter? What was transpiring between you people? You don’t know them, they don’t know you.”
Buddha said, “Our profession is the same. When I laughed, they laughed, they understood that this man belongs to the same kind of profession, where you have to keep people encouraged: ‘Just two miles, just a little more.’”
He said, “For my whole life I have been doing that. People finally reach, but if you tell them from the very beginning, ‘fifteen miles,’ they will drop then and there. But by two miles and two miles they will pass two hundred miles. And I laughed at those people because I know this village, I have visited this village. I know it is not two miles. But I kept quiet because you were so eager to know how far it was. I knew that we were not going to make it. But what was the harm? You could ask them.
“You can understand a deep phenomenon of human psychology. These people are compassionate people: they were not lying, they were simply encouraging you. The first old man pushed you two miles, the second old woman pushed you two miles. The third man also pushed you two miles; you just needed a few more people and you would reach the town! But now you have dropped your bag. It is okay, we can stay here under this big tree. The town is still not two miles!”

The mystery school helps you not to be alone in a search which is basically lonely, helps you to keep courage in a search which is unpredictable.
But the master, his authority, his love – you cannot believe that your master would be lying. But there are even higher values. If I can help you to reach to the ultimate goal by just lying a little I will not hesitate, I will lie – because I know you will forgive me; not only forgive me, you will be grateful that I lied for you. If I had told you the truth, perhaps you would have stopped.
The journey is long, it is tedious. Everything has to be dropped, taken away. This is possible only when somebody you love, somebody you are devoted to, somebody you trust, says, “Don’t be bothered. The things that you are dropping are not real, and unless you drop them you will not find the real.” All that is unreal has to be dropped. You have to come to a point of utter nakedness where you don’t have anything – no personality, no name, no fame, no face – because all faces are different masks that you have been using on different occasions.
You can see it. Just sit by the side of the road, see the people on Juhu Beach. You can tell from far away whether a couple is married or not. How can you say? The married man looks as if he has been beaten the whole day, and is now somehow trying to reach home and fall on his bed and forget the whole nightmare. But he cannot show that face to his wife. When he looks at his wife he smiles, runs to bring the ice cream – although he is cursing in his mind, “This woman is a hell!” But he is presenting ice cream to the hell, or bhelpuri.
But if he is with somebody else’s wife then you can see – his eyes have a shine, he looks younger. He looks beautiful, he looks so energetic. You can just sit down and note the people who are passing – who is married and who is unmarried, who is going with somebody else’s wife. Different masks…
When you are with your beloved you have one face; when you are with your wife you have a different face. Strange. When you are with your master, the boss, you have one face; when you are with your servant you have another face.
With the boss you go on moving your tail – which does not exist at all, but it moves. With your servant you don’t behave as if he is a human being. Have you ever said to your servant, “Good morning” or “Good night”? No, the servant is not human. He can go on passing through your room and you don’t even take note of it that anybody has passed.
These masks will fall down, and behind these masks is just your skeleton. It creates fear. But behind the skeleton is your real face, your original face. But you will have to pass through all this agony before you can feel ecstasy. Everybody wants to feel ecstasy, but nobody wants to go through the agony. Agony is the price – you will have to pay for it. Alone it will be very difficult, but when there is a school and many people are passing through different phases they can help each other.
And every mystery school can exist only in one way, and that is that they have a living master. Once the living master is gone the mystery school disperses. That’s why you don’t see mystery schools becoming religions.
There were mystery schools around Gautam Buddha, but that mystery school dispersed. What is now known as Buddhism has nothing to do with his mystic teachings. It is the knowledgeable people, the students, the scholars, the researchers, who have combined all his teachings, compiled, edited them. They have done a great job, but the soul is missing.

It happened on Charles Darwin’s last birthday. He was very old, everybody was thinking that perhaps this was the last birthday, so all the friends and colleagues gathered to celebrate it. The children of the neighborhood also wanted to contribute to the celebration – and they did a great job.
Charles Darwin’s whole life was spent in studying insects, animals, birds, because he was in search of how evolution has happened and what the stages are.
The children played a trick on him. They caught many kinds of insects, cut those insects into different parts and made a new insect – somebody’s head, somebody’s legs, somebody’s body – no such insect exists anywhere. They glued it perfectly well, made it ready, and when the party was on they entered, placed the insect before Charles Darwin and said, “People are afraid that you are not going to live long. We are also afraid, because you have not studied this insect up to now. There is no reference to this insect in your books.”
He looked at the insect; he could not believe it. He had never come across such a thing! And these neighborhood boys, where did they get it from? Then he looked from this side and that side, and those children were hilarious…
And they asked, “Can you tell us the name of this insect?”
He said, “Yes. It is a humbug.”

All religious scriptures are humbugs – perfectly glued. And those who don’t have any experience of truth of their own cannot find what is missing in them – because to find what is missing you must know it.
A mystery school comes into existence with a master, and disappears. And that’s how it should be.
In nature, in existence, everything that is real… A roseflower opens itself in the morning and by the evening it is gone. Only plastic flowers remain; they remain forever.
Becoming part of a mystery school is a great benediction. It is very difficult to find a mystery school, to find people who are searching and not imposing themselves on each other, but only helping each other if there is the need. If there is no need, even help can become a hindrance.
You are absolutely on the right path. You have not taken any wrong turn. Just go on dissolving all that is false. It is beautiful to feel like a cloud, beautiful to feel like just a witness.
These are the moments, the interval. Night has gone, the sun will be rising soon. Make these gaps as beautiful as possible – full of silence, full of gratitude, gratitude to the existence that has given you the chance, gratitude toward all those who have helped. And wait.
Wait is a key word. You cannot force existence to do things. You have just to wait. In the right moment things happen. You have sown the seeds, you are watering the garden; now wait. Any hurry is dangerous. Everything, to grow, takes its time. Only falsities can be manufactured quickly, in an assembly line. But realities grow, and growth needs time.
And the inner growth is the greatest growth in the whole of existence.

============================================================

Osho,
You seem to be fulfilling two roles: an outer one in which you provoke and expose the structure of our society, and a more intimate one in which you encourage your disciples toward the ultimate. Could you please comment?
Existence consists of both: the inner and the outer. Unfortunately, for centuries the inner and the outer have been thought to be opposed to each other. They are not.
The teaching which proposes that the inner and the outer are opposed has caused a tremendous tension in man – because man is a miniature existence, a miniature cosmos. Whatever exists in man also exists on a wider scale in existence, and vice versa. If man can be understood in his totality, you have understood the whole. The function of the master is to bring the inner and outer into a harmony: to create opposition between them is poisoning you.
They are not opposed, they are one – two sides of the same coin, you cannot even separate them. Can you separate the inner from the outer? If they can be separated then what will you call the inner? What will you call the outer? Of what? Both are part of a coherent whole. But mankind has suffered tremendously because of the division. My function is to destroy the division completely, and to create a synchronicity in man’s outer life and his inner life.
The work is tremendously complicated and great because the outside, up to now, has been considered to be materialism. It has been condemned by the so-called holy people; you have been told to renounce it. If you are not capable of renouncing it you are a sinner. Life has been made a sin. And for centuries, the whole emphasis of all the religions and all the traditions has been on the inner. This is one side of the story.
The other side of the story is that matter is objective, visible; the inner reality seems to be just beautiful talk. So there have been philosophers and thinkers saying that only the outer is real; the inner is only an invention of the priests, it has no existence. These people have condemned spiritualism as nonsense. And both sides agree on one point: that the inner and the outer are contradictory – you can choose one, you cannot choose both.
My approach is a choiceless acceptance of both. Naturally I am against the materialist because I know the inner exists – in fact the outer exists only for the inner, for its protection, for its nourishment. And I am also against the so-called spiritualists because I cannot deny the reality of matter. It is so evidently there all around us that only people who can close their eyes, their reasoning, their understanding, their intelligence, can believe that this is all illusion, that it does not really exist.
Just try. When you go out, go through the wall, not through the gate – and you will know whether it is illusion or reality. Even a Shankaracharya will go through the gate, not through the wall – and his whole life he will try to prove that the wall is an illusion, that it only appears to be, but it is not there.
There is a beautiful incident:

One fine morning, Shankaracharya – the Shankaracharya, the first shankaracharya – after taking his bath in the Ganges in Varanasi, is coming up the steps and a man is coming down the steps. It is still dark. The sun has not risen yet, and the man touches Shankaracharya. And the moment he touches him he says, “My God, please forgive me. I am a sudra.”
Shankaracharya is very angry – a man who says that everything outer is illusory, even for him the body of a sudra is not illusory. He says, “You wasted my time. Now I have to take another bath.”
The sudra said, “Before you take the bath, please answer my few questions. If you don’t answer you can take a bath, but I will touch you again – and that will be a real waste of time.”
He has put Shankaracharya into such a corner. And there is nobody around, so Shankaracharya agrees to answer his questions: “You seem to be such a stubborn man. First you touch me, then you declare that you are a sudra, and now you are forcing me to answer your questions. What are your questions?”
The sudra said, “My questions are very simple. I want to know whether my body is sudra, untouchable. Is there any difference between my body and your body? Is there any difference between my blood and your blood, my bones and your bones? Would it be possible, if we both died, for anybody to decide which body was a brahmin’s body and which body was a sudra’s body? Our skeletons will be the same, so please tell me: is my body untouchable?
“If not, then is my soul untouchable? And you are the man who has been teaching that God is in everybody’s soul – is it more in you and less in me? Is there some difference of quantity or quality? Or does it exist only in you, and in me there is no God, no satchitanand, no truth, no consciousness, no bliss? And remember, you are standing near the Ganges and the sun is rising. Don’t lie! And this is not a philosophical discussion; it is a question of my life and death.”
Shankaracharya moved all around the country, winning great debates with great scholars, but he remained silent before this sudra. His question was very simple: bodies are bodies, made of the same stuff, and consciousness is consciousness, made of the same stuff. Where is the distinction?
Seeing Shankaracharya silent he said, “If you have understood me, then just go back, no need to take another bath. If you take another bath – then answer my question!”
And you will be surprised – in his whole life, this was perhaps Shankaracharya’s only defeat. He had to leave the place and go back to the temple without taking another bath. Of course he was not courageous enough to say the truth. The question was simple, but he could see that whatever he said was going to be against his own philosophical teachings, against his own religion. It was better to keep silent, not to say anything.
But the untouchable man – nobody knows his name – must have been of tremendous intelligence. He managed to get the answer because he made it clear, “If you take the bath I am going to touch you again. If you accept my standpoint that there is no difference, then simply go back to your temple – it is time for your morning prayer.”
Seeing the situation, Shankaracharya went back to the temple. But that destroys his whole philosophy; within five minutes his whole life’s effort is destroyed. And the reason is that his philosophy is against existence. This unknown man was simply stating a fact – that the outer is material, the inner is spiritual, and there is no conflict.

Have you seen any conflict between your soul and body – fighting, wrestling, beating each other? There is tremendous harmony. In fact whenever the harmony is not there, you are sick. The healthier you are, the more harmonious. Disease can be defined as a conflict between the outer and the inner; they have fallen apart, they are not moving together, the harmony is broken. The function of the physician is to bring the harmony back, to bring the music back, to make your life an orchestra.
The master is a physician – not of your ordinary diseases but of your existential conflicts. That’s why I have been fighting on two fronts. I have to fight the old traditions, old religions, old orthodoxies, because they will not allow you ever to be healthy and whole. They will cripple you. The more crippled you are the greater saint you become. So on one hand, I have to fight with any kind of thinking or theology which divides you. Secondly, I have to work on the growth of your inner being.
Both are part of the same process: how to make you a whole man, how to destroy all the rubbish that is preventing you from becoming whole – that is the negative part; and the positive part is how to make you aflame with meditation, with silence, with love, with joy, with peace. That is the positive part of my teaching. With my positive part there is no problem; I could have gone around the world teaching people meditation, peace, love, silence – and nobody would have opposed me. But I would not have been of any help to anybody, because who is going to destroy all that rubbish? And the rubbish has to be destroyed first, it is blocking the way. It is your whole conditioning.
You have been programmed from your very childhood with absolute lies, but they have been repeated so often that you have forgotten that they are lies. That’s the whole secret of advertising: just go on repeating. On the radio, on the television, in the films, in the newspapers, on the walls, everywhere, go on repeating.
In the old days it was thought that wherever there is a demand the supply happens on its own accord. Now, that is not the rule. The rule is, if you have something to supply, create the demand. Go on hammering certain words into people’s minds so that they completely forget that they have been listening to it on the radio, on the television, in the films, in the newspaper, and they start believing it. Continually listening to something, they start purchasing it – any soap, any toothpaste, any cigarette – you can sell anything.

I have heard about a man who was thought to be a great salesman. His company was very proud of him. The company was dealing in real estate, and there was a big plot of land that had been with them for years and they had not been able to find anybody even interested in it. Finally the owner called the great salesman and asked him. He said, “Don’t be worried,” and he sold the plot.
After just fifteen days the rains started, and the plot was at least fifteen feet under water, fifteen feet deep. That was the reason nobody was interested in purchasing it. Anybody could see from the road what would happen in the rains. All around, the land was so deep. The man who had purchased it came, really angry – he rushed into the owner’s office and said, “Is this business or robbery? Where is your salesman?”
The owner asked, “What is the matter? What happened?”
He said, “What happened? He sold me a plot that is now under fifteen feet of water! It has become a big lake. What am I going to do with it? I will kill that man. Otherwise, return my money.”
The owner said, “Don’t be worried; just sit down.”
He called his salesman, and the salesman said, “This is not a problem, you just come with me, I will solve it. You need your money? Take your money with fifteen days interest because I have better buyers ready.”
The man said, “What?”
The salesman said, “Don’t change your mind – take your money with interest, and forget all about that land. It is such a beauty. You can make a beautiful house on it after the rains, and when the rains come again you can make arrangements so that the water does not flow out. You will have the only place of its kind in the whole city, a lake palace. And as far as the situation right now is concerned I will give you two boats, we have been saving them for this situation.”
And he sold two boats to the man!
The owner was just standing there, watching the whole scene. Those boats were absolutely useless – they had been lying down there for years, rotten. They would drown the moment they were put into the water. He said to his dealer, “You are creating more trouble.”
The salesman said, “Don’t be worried. If I can manage that big a trouble, I can manage just two boats.”

You just have to create a desire in people – “lake palace.” He was only thinking of making a house. You have changed the desire and the ambition into a lake palace. The salesman said, “Just think, if you want to make a lake palace, first you will have to make a lake. And we are giving you a ready-made lake and not charging anything!”
For centuries man has been sold beliefs, dogmas, creeds which are absolutely untrue, which have no evidence, except in your ambition, except in your laziness. You don’t want to do anything, and you want to reach to heaven! And there are people who are ready to give you maps, shortcuts – as much of a shortcut as you want. Just get up in the morning with the name of God – remembering it for two, three minutes while you are getting ready to get out of the bed – and that’s enough. Once in a while go to the Ganges, take a bath so all your sins are finished – you are purified. And all religions have created the same kinds of things – go to Kaaba and everything is forgiven.
Mohammedans are poor people, and they are poor because of their belief: they are against taking money on interest or giving money with interest. Now, the whole of business depends on interest; they are bound to remain poor. And it is told to them that you should go to Kaaba at least once in life, and that’s enough – going seven times around that stone of Kaaba all sins are finished, all virtues shower on you. Such shortcuts.

One man came to Ramakrishna. He was going to Varanasi to take a holy dip, but he was interested in Ramakrishna, so before going he went to touch his feet. And Ramakrishna said, “But what is the need to go to Varanasi, because the Ganges is coming here” – the Ganges was flowing just behind his temple where they were sitting: “The Ganges is coming to Kolkata itself. Where are you going?”
But the man said, “In the scriptures, the Ganges in Varanasi has a specialty. It is the same Ganges, but if you take a bath in Varanasi then all your sins are washed away.”
Ramakrishna was a very simple man. He said, “You can go with my blessings, but remember one thing. Have you seen? – on the bank of the Ganges there are big trees.”
The man said, “Yes. I have been there once with my father when I was very young. But why are you mentioning those trees?”
He said, “I am mentioning those trees because people don’t know their purpose. The Ganges is great – you take a dip and all your sins leave you immediately, but they sit on the trees and they wait for you! They say, ‘Son, sometime you will come back on the same road. Where are you going to go? How long can you remain in the Ganges? You can manage as long as you want – one hour, two hours, one day, two days – but finally you will have to come out.’”
That man said, “Not even two days; I will just take the bath and come out. It will take five minutes at the most, in such cold weather… But this is strange. Nobody told me that all those sins are sitting on the trees.”
Ramakrishna said, “And the moment you put on your clothes… You are putting on clothes and the sins are coming back down on you, settling. And sometimes it happens that somebody else’s sins, if they like you… ‘This man looks beautiful. That man is already dead, finished; this man is good, young, has some possibilities of committing more sins’ – they may drop on you; that is the greatest difficulty. Yours will certainly come back upon you, and others! All those trees are full of sins, so try to save yourself somehow.”
He said, “How can I save myself? You can’t see sins. I can’t see them when I take the bath, nor will I be able to see them when they descend upon me again!”
Ramakrishna said, “That is up to you. That is why I don’t go there, because it is absolutely useless. Those trees are not just uselessly standing there, they have been doing their job for centuries.”
The man said, “You have created such a doubt in me. I will go home and think again whether to go or not. It is an unnecessary wastage if this is going to happen. And you have made me afraid also – others’ sins, which I have not committed at all…”

The priests are giving you shortcuts because you are lazy. You really don’t want to do anything for your inner search.
Heaven is not somewhere far above in the clouds. It is within you, and for that you don’t need to go to the Ganges or to go to Kaaba. You need to go to yourself. But that is something that no priest of any religion wants you to do, because the moment you do it you get out of all the bondage of religions – Hinduism, Mohammedanism, Christianity – all that seems to be stupid and nonsense. You have found your truth.
So my work begins with negativity: I have to destroy every program that has been given to you. By whom, it does not matter – whether it is Catholic or Protestant does not matter. I have to deprogram you so you are clean and unburdened: your doors and your windows are opened. And then the second part, the essential part, is to teach you how to enter within. You know very well how to go out; for many lives you have been going out and out and out. You are accustomed to it. You don’t think when you go to your office, “Now turn left, now turn right, now turn…” When you come home, you don’t think in this way. Simply, mechanically, like a robot you go on coming home every day, going to the office every day. The outer journey is your habit.
But the inner world is a new world where you have not even looked, where you have never taken a single step. So I have to teach you how, slowly, you can step inward. Even when I say to people to go inward, immediately they ask questions which show how focused on the outside things they are. I say to them, “Sit silently.”
And they will ask me, “Can I do Gayatri Mantra?”
Whether you do Gayatri Mantra or you read the newspaper does not matter, both are outside. I am telling you, “Sit silently.”
They say, “That is right, but at least I can repeat omkar…” It is pitiable. I feel sad for them, that I am telling them to be silent but they are asking me to fill their silence with something. They don’t want to be silent. If nothing else, then omkar will do – anything will do.

I was a teacher in the university. A professor of mathematics became interested, just seeing me day after day. I would pass just by the side of his office. We were not introduced – still, I would put one of my fingers on my lips and look at him. He would just look here and there – “Is anybody seeing or not? Otherwise they will think this is mad, I don’t know this man.”
In the beginning he used to look away, to the other side. I would have to clap. Then he thought it was better to stand at the window so I would not have to clap, because others would hear. And when I insisted on putting one finger on my lips he thought, “It looks odd that I don’t do anything,” so he started putting one finger on his lips. This is how we became great friends.
One day he came to my house. He said, “This is too much. Are you mad or something? Why do you torture me? And every day! I am so afraid of you, that if you come and my class is there, and if they see all this, they will start doing the same thing. And in front of other people I cannot put my finger on my lips because they will ask, ‘What are you doing?’”
I said, “There was no other way.” And he was an Englishman. I said, “Without an introduction it is very difficult to start talking with an Englishman, so I thought this would be perfectly right. I am not talking, I am not saying anything to you. I am just putting… It is my finger, these are my lips. I have every authority to put them wherever I want.”
He said, “That is right, but – just in front of me, always in front of me!”
I said, “You have come. Now things can begin.”
He said, “What do you mean?”
I said, “I mean, are you going to destroy your life in mathematics?”
He was an old man, just ready to retire. And he was waiting to retire and go back to England and settle back in his own country.
He said, “This is an important question I have asked myself many times – am I going to destroy my whole life in mathematics? What have I gained? Just figures and figures, and I am torturing myself unnecessarily and gaining nothing.”
I said, “I know a way. You can sit silently. That is the symbol; this one finger on my lips simply means be silent, just for half an hour. You are alone” – his wife was dead and his sons had gone into their own businesses – “you have nothing else to do. You have a beautiful house and a beautiful garden. You can sit anywhere, just in silence.”
He said, “The idea is good, but in silence can I go on repeating from one to a hundred? And from a hundred backward: ninety-nine, ninety-eight, ninety-seven, down to one, and then back? That way it will be easy for me, just like a ladder – from one to two to three to four, and then coming back down the ladder. But without engagement, just sitting silently…?”
I said, “This won’t do, because you will still be doing the same stupid thing – the mathematics you have been doing your whole life. But what is the trouble with sitting in silence?”
He said, “It just looks… Somebody may see me. Somebody may ask, ‘What are you doing?’ Just my whole upbringing is such that if somebody asks, ‘What are you doing?’ you cannot say ‘nothing,’ otherwise people will think something is loose. Nothing? The whole world is there to do everything and you are sitting here doing nothing?”

In every language there are proverbs which say, “Anything is better than nothing.” Anything – without any conditions! Strange – anything is better than nothing? Every language has such proverbs. “Don’t sit there doing nothing; do something!”
I have heard…

One woman was telling another woman, her neighbor, “Today there is good news. My son, who used to do nothing, has joined a meditation group. Now he is doing meditation.”
I was just passing; I said, “You don’t know what you are talking about, because meditation simply means doing nothing. Your boy has really found the right people, his own kind. Now he is not doing nothing alone, he is doing nothing with many people.”

Meditation is not something. Once the negative part is complete – and it depends on your intelligence; it can be complete within a second. If you can see that all that you have is borrowed, and if you have courage to decide that “I will not carry anything borrowed; I take the decision to find out something for myself, my own truth…”
What is the point of knowing all that has been written about love and never being in love? You may collect a whole library on love – beautiful poetries, dramas, novels – but it is all pointless; you don’t know what love is. You have never loved. A single moment of love is more valuable than your whole library.
The same is true about everything that is valuable. A single insight into yourself is more valuable than all your scriptures. A single glimpse of your consciousness and you have entered the real temple – which is not made of bricks and marble, but which already exists in you; it is made of consciousness itself. It is a flame, an eternal flame which has been burning since eternity. It needs no fuel. It is waiting for you to see it, because by seeing it your eyes for the first time will have something – the joy, the light, the song, the beauty, the ecstasy.
And it is not that when you enter in, your outer will be forgotten. As you enter in, your outer starts radiating the inner – in your gestures, the way you see, the way you talk, the authority behind your words. Even your touch, even your presence, even your silence will be a message. The inner and the outer are parts of one reality.
First you have to cleanse the outer, which has been distorted by centuries. It is fortunate that nobody can distort your inner reality; nobody can enter there except you. You cannot even invite your lover, your friend. You cannot take anyone there except you. It is fortunate; otherwise everything would have been spoiled in you and recovery would have been impossible.
Only the outer side is covered with dust of all kinds; a small understanding can make you free of it. That is an essential part – the negative part – to know the false as false, because the moment you know it is false it drops, it disappears. And after that the inner journey is very light, very simple.

Osho,
When we drop the attitude of judging people negatively, it follows that acknowledging the positive in people has to be dropped too – the whole package has to go, does it not?
Yes, the whole package of judging has to go. Nobody has the right to judge anybody, negatively or positively. These are the ways of dominating people. When you judge someone you are trying to interfere in his life, which is not your business. A real, authentic man simply allows people to be themselves.
It is not my business to judge anybody as good, as bad. Everybody has to be conscious of his own qualities. If I want to help people, I cannot help by judging; I can help them only by making them more conscious. If I want to help people – and there is great beauty in helping, great joy – then the first thing is a total acceptance of the person, whoever he is, whatever he is. This is the way existence has brought him. There must be some need that he is fulfilling; without him existence will be a little less, he will be missed. And nobody can replace him; he is so unique that he is irreplaceable.
But the whole history of man is that we have not been told about the uniqueness of people. We have been told that people have to be in a certain way, have to behave in a certain way, have to live in a certain way – then they are good, then they should be rewarded by respect, by honor here on earth. And they should be rewarded in the other world also, with all kinds of pleasures. We have been told things which are bad – and those people should be condemned here, dishonored, rejected by the society, made to suffer in every possible way. And finally, after death they will have to suffer in hell.
And the things that decide goodness and badness are shifting, changing – what was good yesterday is no longer good today. What was bad one day becomes good another day. Just look at the long span of history and you will be surprised.
For example, Rama, Krishna, Parasurama, who are incarnations of God, are all nonvegetarians, meat eaters; they are very ancient. You can think of the present time – Ramakrishna used to eat fish. Being a Bengali, and not eating fish, seems to be impossible. In fact every Bengali house has a small pond. They grow fish; just as you grow other things, they grow fish. Naturally their houses smell fishy.
When the British Empire took over India, Calcutta was their first capital. All the Bengalis had to be the first clerks, the first bureaucracy, and they were all smelling of fish. That’s why the Britishers started calling them babu; babu means one who smells. You can say “Bengali babu” and there is no problem, but you cannot say “Punjabi babu” – that does not suit. With “Punjabi,” babu does not suit at all – “Punjabi babu?” It is impossible – “Punjabi” and “babu”? The Bengali is a babu, and in his shadow even the Bihari has become a babu, but there it stopped.
And it is strange; because the powerful British empire was calling Bengalis babus – it was a condemnatory word; ba means with, bu means smell. Even a condemnatory word became a very respectable word because the powerful people were using it. So now when you want to show respect to somebody you call him babuji – Babu Rajendra Prasad. You have not even left out the president of India; you call him babu.
As time changes… Today we cannot accept, no sensitive person can accept that a man who was thought to be a reincarnation of God can be a meat eater. It simply looks awkward, embarrassing. After Mahavira and Gautam Buddha, values changed so dramatically. They had to change, because these two persons lived a vegetarian life and proved that any man who has love in his heart, compassion, cannot be a meat eater. And at the heights of consciousness you cannot imagine that a man continues to eat meat – something is wrong.
In every age, man has to define what is good, what is bad. You never think that Rama, obeying his father – a dying man, under the influence of a young wife… In the first place, to have four wives was wrong. Then, even at the point of death the man had not the courage to say no to his young wife. Such a henpecked husband! For no reason at all he ordered Rama to go to the forest for fourteen years. And this was a value in those days – obedience. Rama has been respected for centuries because he obeyed his father without even asking, “Why? What have I done? For what is this punishment being given to me?” Fourteen years he passed, on foot, in the forest.
Today, nobody who has any intelligence can say that obedience can be of such a high value. He should have disobeyed. And this is my feeling, that if Rama had disobeyed Dasharatha, his father, this country would have been a totally different country. His obedience made this whole country a country of slaves. It is not a simple phenomenon, it is very complicated. When you respect Rama, you are respecting obedience.
Then invaders came and the country obeyed, and invaders went on coming and the country went on obeying. In five thousand years you have not seen a single revolution because revolution has never been a value for us. We have never thought that revolution is anything good. We have always condemned the rebellious spirit, while the rebellious spirit is the only spirit in the world which helps evolution. If we are lagging behind everybody in the world, it is because of our respect for obedience.
I am not saying be disrespectful, I am not saying be disobedient. I am simply saying be discriminating. And discrimination comes out of awareness – be alert, be aware, see the whole situation. And let the decision come from yourself, not from outside – not from your father, not from your teachers, not from your priests. Listen to what they have to say, listen carefully, respectfully. But the decision has to come from your own innermost being. Then you will have individuality and you will have independence. And with you, the whole society will move higher into consciousness, into freedom.
Don’t judge people. Rather, love people. You are not told to love people; knowingly or unknowingly, you are being taught to judge people. Love knows no judgment; it simply loves, as you are. It is your question, it is your life. How to live it? And if my love is truly great, it may change you without any effort on my part. Without judging you, there is a possibility of changing you.
You can look at me: I have lived with thousands of people; I have never judged anybody. I have simply loved everybody who has been with me, and I have seen tremendous changes happening in them without any effort on my part. Just my love has made them different.
The other day I received a letter from an American jail. One jailer loves me. And without bothering about the government, he gives time to the criminals to meditate. His jail is a special jail where only very severe criminals – either those who are going to live their whole lives in jail or who are going to be crucified, only those kinds of people are there.
After a few years in American jails, if their behavior is good, people are given a vacation – for one week they can go and visit their family, their friends. But not in this jail, because in this jail you cannot expect… It has already been judged that a man who has murdered seven persons – leaving him for seven days outside, he has nothing to lose. He can cut up as many people as he wants; you cannot punish him more than you have already punished him. He can escape, there is no risk; even if you catch him again you cannot do anything, you have given him the ultimate punishment that is possible. So in this jail, holidays don’t happen.
But my friend the jailer, without asking permission, started giving a few criminals holidays after years of meditation. He was a little hesitant about one criminal who had committed seven murders, but then he remembered, “Don’t judge, just love.” And lovingly, he gave him seven days and told him that if he needed anything he was willing to support him: “Go out and live fully, seven days.”
He was not expecting that the man would be back, and he was expecting that he was going to be in trouble. If the man did not come back then there was bound to be trouble for the jailer. But the man came back after five days. The jailer asked, “Why are you back after five days?”
He said, “I was worried about you, that you must not be sleeping; you must be afraid that I may not come back. It became such a concern to me, your worry, that I thought it was worth dropping two days; better to go back. You have loved me so much; can’t I do only this much for you – coming back to jail two days earlier? It does not matter to me. I am to live here my whole life – two days more… But I was not able to sleep; I was concerned about you. I knew that you would be continuously worried about what would happen, whether I would come back or not. And I could not enjoy, because I was missing the meditation.”
You are not to judge anybody. But you can do something more: you can love. You can help the person to meditate, to become more aware. And perhaps your love and his meditation may bring the change, may bring the transformation. And it will not be imposed from outside – it will be coming from inside, like a flower, and blossoming in the person. And when anything comes from inside and blossoms, it has tremendous beauty.

============================================================

Osho,
My feeling is that since I have known you, your sannyasins have passed through an evolution, but you have too. So are we making this journey hand in hand?
It is true, and it is not true. The sannyasins have been certainly evolving, going through radical changes in their lifestyle, in their thinking, in their behavior, in their very vision of existence. I am also moving moment to moment, changing. In this sense it is true that I have gone through a revolution hand in hand with my sannyasins. But in another sense – and a far deeper sense – your change is the change inward. I am moving beyond the inner and the outer. The reality is neither inner nor outer; it transcends both.
I love the expression “hand in hand,” but it is just like when the sun rises in the morning and the birds start singing, the flowers open and release their fragrance. As the sun rises, they are also blossoming – hand in hand – but the distance is immense. That’s why I said the question is a little complicated.
I am with you and yet far away; the distance is just like that between a rose opening and the sun rising. Without the sunrise the rose will not open. And I say it on my own authority: that if all the roses decide not to open the sun will not rise. It will look so stupid – for whom to rise, for what?
Existence is interconnected so deeply, so intimately, but the distances are vast. On the full-moon night you see the ocean: it is affected by the full moon – hand in hand – but the moon is far away. And it is not only the ocean that is affected; even you are affected, because eighty percent of you is ocean water.
It is not strange that the people who have become enlightened – only with one exception, Mahavira – have all become enlightened on the full-moon day. Mahavira became enlightened on the night of amawas – no moon in the night, total darkness. It is because of this fact he is called Mahavira. That is not his name. Mahavira means the great warrior, going against the current – and not only going against the current but achieving it.
Gautam Buddha became enlightened on the day of the full moon. Gautam Buddha’s whole life is connected with the full moon: he was born on a full-moon night, he became enlightened on the full-moon night, he died on the full-moon night. This cannot be just coincidence.
And now psychologists have been studying the effects of the full moon on the human psyche, and the results are staggering. On the full-moon night more people go mad than any other night, the number is almost double. More people commit suicide – again, the number is almost double. More people commit murder, again the number is almost double.
The full-moon night does something to the human psyche. The full moon is so far away – but not so far away; it affects you. Since the very beginning it has been affecting the poets, the painters, the sculptors, the musicians, the dancers. They all feel that something is different under the full moon; that perhaps the rays of the full moon are hand in hand…
Yes, you have been going through many radical changes to reach yourself. I have been going through many revolutions to reach beyond, beyond myself. You have been moving toward enlightenment, and I have been going beyond it – and this whole process is going hand in hand.
But the distance is vast – remember the distance, and also remember the closeness, the intimacy.

Osho,
I seem to recall you once saying that we only have glimpses into existence in proportion to our capacity to absorb and integrate them. Nietzsche's insight that, “That which is done out of love always takes place beyond good and evil” was part of an understanding that literally drove him insane. Could you please talk about this?
A genius of the caliber of Friedrich Nietzsche is always in danger of going mad. Nobody has ever heard of any idiot going mad. To go mad, first you have to have a mind. A genius is walking on a sword – just a little mistake and he can fall, fall into an eternal darkness of madness.
Nietzsche is perhaps one of the most prolific geniuses the world has produced. He had so many insights that finally he had to change his way of writing. His writing became aphoristic because the insights were crowding in his mind and if he were to write an essay, the other insights might be forgotten, might be lost. He started writing aphoristically, in maxims.
But to have too many insights is dangerous. One can afford only a limited number. And Nietzsche was confronted with an infinite number of insights. Each insight could have become a philosophy. For example, this insight that when there is love there is no question of good and evil, love is beyond both. That’s all. He could have written a whole system on it, explained it in detail in different contexts.
There are traditional ways of writing, and they have a certain validity about them because you cannot misinterpret them, you cannot misunderstand them. For example, Bertrand Russell, in his famous book Principia Mathematica, devotes two hundred and sixty-five pages to a simple thing. You cannot conceive how a man can manage such a big-sized book, two hundred and sixty pages, just to prove that two plus two are really four. But he has taken every possible consideration, every possible question, every possible implication. He has exhausted the subject, he has not left anything for anybody. That is the traditional way of writing – systematic, rational.
But Friedrich Nietzsche had no time – life is too short and his insights were so many. So he would simply write a maxim: “Love takes you beyond good and evil. If you love, then don’t bother about good and evil.” He is right, dangerously right – we will have to look into a few of the implications of his statement.
Ordinarily, for centuries, love has been synonymous with good – it takes you beyond bad, beyond evil. Love cannot harm, love cannot be violent, love cannot be destructive, love cannot be evil; those are the qualities of hate. For thousands of years man has thought love and goodness are synonymous.
But Friedrich Nietzsche is far more right than the tradition. Nobody has thought about it before him. That is the function of a genius: he brings new light, new glimpses into the world; he opens new windows into existence. But he has not explained it.
I agree with him totally. Good and evil are opposite to each other and they exist together. Just like darkness and light, life and death – all these opposites exist together, you cannot separate them. If you make love synonymous with good, then the evil will follow you like a shadow; and that has been happening everywhere around the world, for centuries.
There is a treatise by a psychoanalyst entitled The Intimate Enemy. It is about love: whomsoever you love you are bound to hate. This will be like a wheel – day comes, night comes; love comes, hate comes.
It is not something unnatural that lovers are continuously fighting, nagging each other. It is part of the game – you have chosen love, you have chosen hate as the other side of the coin. Once in a while things become too much and the hate part asserts itself. If you watch the life of lovers you will be immensely surprised: before they feel loving toward each other, first they fight. When their fighting part is fulfilled, then their love part comes up – they are simply moving on a mechanical wheel. Then they are hugging each other and kissing each other and, just a few minutes before, they were throwing things at each other.
Before every act of lovemaking there is a pillow fight. I don’t know what pillows have done – they are such innocent people, they never do any harm to anybody – but they unnecessarily get caught in between the lovers because it happens that they are on the bed, and handy. After a good fight – saying things against each other, against each other’s family – when this catharsis is over suddenly they are full of love, hugging each other. You cannot believe these are the same people. Then why were they doing that drama before? And this happens every day, it is a routine process.
Certainly your love is not what Nietzsche means by love. He means by love what I mean by love – love not addressed to anybody in particular but just your aroma, your field of energy. Just as the perfume of the rose surrounds the rose, a loving man is surrounded by love. That love is beyond good and evil; it transcends that intrinsic contradiction of the ordinary love.
But it is true that a man like Friedrich Nietzsche, reaching to the very heights of understanding, became mad. The reason is not his insight. The reason is that his insight remained only intellectual. He had no foundation in meditation, he never heard of the word.
If Friedrich Nietzsche had been born in the East he would have been another Gautam Buddha, nothing less – perhaps more. But in the West, intellect seems to be all. So he came to conclusions logically – beautiful conclusions, and then he tried to live according to those intellectual conclusions for which there was no meditative foundation. He fell apart. He had a nervous breakdown. He tried to reach where only meditators are allowed; and naturally he had to fall from those heights, and he suffered multiple fractures. His genius was absolutely certain, but his genius led him into madness; that too is certain.
In the East it has never happened. One should look into it. In the West it has always happened: whenever there was a man of great genius, sooner or later there was a nervous breakdown, as if he had seen so much that he could not absorb it. He had not enough wings, but still he had taken a long flight into the sky – tired, tattered, he fell down.
In the East it has never happened, because we never begin with insights. First we make certain that you have a foundation. We make your wings stronger. We don’t care about flights; we care about your wings.
You cannot conceive a Gautam Buddha, a Bodhidharma, a Mahakashyapa – even to conceive that these people can be mad is impossible. Their sanity is so perfect, and their sanity is rooted in their meditativeness, in their silence, in their peace, in their grounding in their own being. Because they have roots deep down into the earth, they are capable of sending their branches high to have a dialogue with the stars. Their flowers can go high in the sky to release the perfume.
You must remember one fact: a tree grows only proportionately. It can go only to a certain height if it has a certain strength, a depth to its roots.
In Japan there is an old art. I don’t call it “art,” but they call it art. I call it murder. But people go to see it from all over the world because there are only a few trees – five hundred years old and six inches in height! You can see that, although it is just six inches high, the tree is old. Its bark is old, its leaves are old; just its height has somehow been prevented.
And the strategy is that in the pots in which those trees are put there is no dirt in the bottom. So the gardeners, from generation to generation – because the tree is five hundred years old; many generations of the family that owns the tree have passed – they go on cutting the roots, they don’t allow the roots to grow. The pot has no dirt in the bottom, otherwise the roots will find their way into the earth. The roots go on becoming older, the tree goes on becoming older, but because the roots cannot spread, cannot go deep into the earth, the tree cannot go high into the sky.
People think it is an art. It is sheer murder; it is a crime against the trees. And the same crime has been committed against man all over the world. Your roots have been cut.
Intellect can have flights, but it has no roots. Once in a while a genius may suffer from his own intelligence, and finally either he will commit suicide – because the tension of his intelligence will become too much, his thoughts will become too many – or he will go mad.
In the West many professors, many philosophers, mathematicians, painters, poets, novelists – all kinds of creative people who have genius – have gone mad or have committed suicide. A few have done both. First they went mad, and then when they were thought to be cured and were released from the madhouse, they committed suicide.
Vincent van Gogh, one of the great painters of Holland, was in the madhouse for one year. He was released, and the next day he committed suicide. And he wrote a letter to his brother in which he mentions, “It is better not to be, than to be mad. I don’t want to be mad again and I know I cannot avoid it; my mind is again moving in the same directions. All their medicines and tranquilizers can keep me normal in a madhouse, but to live in a madhouse is not life. At least I will have the satisfaction that, although I could not live my life, I could manage my own death. I was not the master of my life, but I was the master of my death.”
And he was so young, only thirty-three years old, but one of the greatest painters the world has produced. His insights were such that people who have been studying his paintings are simply puzzled, they cannot figure out how this man managed – because one hundred years ago he painted stars as spirals. You don’t see stars as spirals, nobody has ever seen spirals, and in his paintings all his stars are spirals. Even other painters were saying, “Watch out. You are going toward insanity. This is nonsense, nobody has ever seen it. Stars are not spirals.”
Van Gogh said, “What can I do? I see them as spirals.” And after one hundred years, just four weeks before one hundred years had passed, modern physicists came to the conclusion that stars are spirals. Our vision… Because they are so far away, that’s why we cannot see that they are spirals.
Now people are puzzled. Van Gogh had the insight, had the genius – without any instruments. It took one hundred years for the scientists to find out, with all kinds of sophisticated instruments, that stars are spirals. Van Gogh, with his bare eyes…
But he himself started thinking he must be mad. No, nobody supported his vision; even painters, great painters laughed. And this was not only one case, this was the case about all his paintings. He was seeing things which nobody else sees.
A genius is always ahead of his time. The bigger the genius, the farther in the future is his reach in time. Nobody is going to agree with him. He will be thought mad.
Remaining mad was not worthwhile; van Gogh committed suicide. We forced him to commit suicide. What harm was he doing? That’s why I say don’t judge people. He was not doing any harm to anybody. The canvas he was painting on was not in any way insulted. The canvas was not reporting to the police station, “This man is making stars into spirals on me.” The colors that he was using had no objection…
But people go on continually judging. Can’t you keep quiet? Perhaps he sees better than you, farther than you. And anyway, he is not doing harm to anybody.
You will be surprised: in his whole life he could not sell a single painting. Who would purchase it? Only a genius, only a man of insight, only a man of the same category as van Gogh would purchase one; otherwise, who would purchase his paintings? You will not purchase his painting, because anybody coming to your house will look at the painting and will think you are mad: “Is this painting? How much have you paid?”
And now only two hundred paintings have somehow survived, in friends’ houses. Each painting is worth a million dollars, and van Gogh lived hungry because he could not sell them. His brother used to give him enough money for seven days. Four days he was eating, and three days he was fasting, to purchase materials for paintings. This fast I call religion – not the fasts of Jaina monks; those are stupid fasts. This man was pouring his blood on the canvas. He had something more valuable than his own life and he was ready to sacrifice it.
The same was the case with Friedrich Nietzsche. He was condemned by everybody, because if you say love takes you beyond good and evil, that means there is something higher than good. And if it leads you beyond good and evil then you are totally free; then your acts cannot be judged as good or bad.
He was right, but he had no meditative support. He could argue about it, but he could not prove it by his own life. He himself could not love the love he was talking about. That love comes only as a fragrance of meditation – and then certainly there is nothing good, nothing bad. Love is the highest value. There cannot be anything higher than that.
I feel deeply sad for Friedrich Nietzsche. I don’t feel for the normal human beings, because whether they are in the East or in the West makes no difference – they will be the same people. Superficial differences will be there of course. But I feel deeply sad for Friedrich Nietzsche, because if he had been in the East he would have raised the consciousness of humanity with his own enlightenment and, perhaps, going beyond it.

Osho,
What is awareness? Why is it lost, and how can it be regained? Are there any steps for the same?
Awareness is never lost. It simply becomes entangled with the other, with objects. So the first thing to be remembered: it is never lost, it is your nature, but you can focus it on anything you want. When you get tired of focusing it on money, on power, on prestige, and that great moment comes in your life when you want to close your eyes and focus your awareness on its own source, on where it is coming from, on the roots – in a split second your life is transformed.
And don’t ask what the steps are; there is only one step. The process is very simple. The step is only one: that is turning in.

In Judaism there is a rebellious school of mystery called Hasidism. Its founder, Baal Shem, was a rare being. In the middle of the night he was coming from the river – that was his routine, because at the river in the night it was absolutely calm and quiet. And he used to simply sit there, doing nothing – just watching his own self, watching the watcher.
This night, when he was coming back, he passed a rich man’s house and the watchman was standing by the door. And the watchman was puzzled because every night, at exactly this time, this man would come back. He came out and he said, “Forgive me for interrupting but I cannot contain my curiosity anymore. You are haunting me day and night, every day. What is your business? Why do you go to the river? I have followed you many times, and there is nothing – you simply sit there for hours, and in the middle of the night you come back.”
Baal Shem said, “I know that you have followed me many times, because the night is so silent I can hear your footsteps. And every day I know you are hiding behind the gate. But it is not only that you are curious about me, I am also curious about you. What is your business?”
He said, “My business? I am a simple watchman.”
Baal Shem said, “My God, you have given me the key word. This is my business too!”
The watchman said, “But I don’t understand. If you are a watchman you should be watching some house, some palace. What are you watching there, sitting in the sand?”
Baal Shem said, “There is a little difference: you are watching for somebody outside who may enter the palace; I simply watch this watcher. Who is this watcher? This is my whole life’s effort; I watch myself.”
The watchman said, “But this is a strange business. Who is going to pay you?”
He said, “It is such bliss, such a joy, such immense benediction, it pays itself profoundly. Just a single moment, and all the treasures are nothing in comparison to it.”
The watchman said, “This is strange; I have been watching my whole life. I never came across such a beautiful experience. Tomorrow night I am coming with you. Just teach me. I know how to watch – it seems only a different direction is needed; you are watching in some different direction.”

There is only one step, and that step is of direction, of dimension. Either we can be focused outside or we can close our eyes to the outside and let our whole consciousness be centered within. And you will know, because you are a knower, you are awareness. You have never lost it, you simply got your awareness entangled in a thousand and one things. Withdraw your awareness from everywhere and just let it rest within yourself, and you have arrived home.

Osho,
Yes!
There was no need to say yes because I have seen it in your eyes. I have heard it when you were sitting near me, although you have not uttered it.
Since you have come to me there has never been a no in you. And it is strange, because your type is no-type! You have said no to everything, and perhaps that is the reason that your no is finished. You don’t have any no anymore, and you have come to the person with whom you can connect only through yes.
To be with a master is to be in a yes attitude. That’s what I mean by receptivity, openness, vulnerability. But I know that you want to say it, thinking perhaps I may not be aware. I am absolutely aware of those people whose heartbeat is saying yes.
There are people who are still in two minds – sometimes yes, sometimes no. There are also people who are attached to their no too much – but I don’t count them, they are not my people. Only those whose yes is unconditional, absolute, categorical, are my people.
And you are fortunate. You belong to my people.
Yes.

============================================================

Osho,
Why don't we drop our miseries, our ignorance and unhappiness? How can a man be happy and blissful?
It is one of the most fundamental questions that a man can ask. It is also strange, because it should be easy to drop suffering, anguish, misery. It should not be difficult: you don’t want to be miserable, so there must be some deep complication behind it. The complication is that from your very childhood you have not been allowed to be happy, to be blissful, to be joyous.
You have been forced to be serious, and seriousness implies sadness. You were forced to do things that you never wanted to do. You were helpless, weak, dependent on people; naturally you had to do what they were saying. You did those things unwillingly, miserably, in deep resistance. Against yourself, you have been forced to do so much that by and by one thing became clear to you: that anything that is against you is right, and anything that is not against you is bound to be wrong. And this whole upbringing constantly filled you with sadness, which is not natural.
To be joyous is natural, just as to be healthy is natural. When you are healthy you don’t go to the doctor to inquire, “Why am I healthy?” There is no need for any question about your health. But when you are sick, you immediately ask, “Why am I sick? What is the reason, the cause of my disease?”
It is perfectly right to ask why you are miserable. It is not right to ask why you are blissful. You have been brought up in an insane society where to be blissful without reason is thought to be madness. If you are simply smiling for no reason at all, people will think something is loose in your head – why are you smiling? Why are you looking so happy? And if you say “I don’t know, I am just being happy,” your answer will only strengthen their idea that something has gone wrong with you. But if you are miserable nobody will ask why you are miserable. To be miserable is natural; everybody is. It is nothing special to you. You are not doing something unique.
Unconsciously this idea goes on settling in you, that misery is natural and blissfulness is unnatural. Blissfulness has to be proved. Misery needs no proof. Slowly it sinks deeper into you – into your blood, into your bones, into your marrow – although naturally it is against you. So you have been forced to be a schizophrenic; something has been forced on you that is against your nature. You have been distracted from yourself into something which you are not.
This creates the whole misery of humanity: that everybody is where he should not be, what he should not be. And because he cannot be where he needs to be – where it is his birthright to be – he is miserable. And you have been in this state of going farther and farther away from yourself; you have forgotten the way back home. So wherever you are, you think this is your home – misery has become your home, anguish has become your nature.
Suffering has been accepted as health, not as sickness. And when somebody says, “Drop this miserable life, drop this suffering that you are carrying unnecessarily,” a very significant question arises: “This is all that we have got! If we drop it we will be no one, we will lose our identity. At least I am somebody right now – somebody miserable, somebody sad, somebody in suffering. If I drop all this then the question will be: What is my identity? Who am I? I don’t know the way back home, and you have taken away the hypocrisy, the false home that was created by the society.”
Nobody wants to stand naked in the street. It is better to be miserable – at least you have something to wear, although it is misery. But there is no harm, everybody else is wearing the same kind of clothes. For those who can afford it, their miseries are costly. Those who cannot afford it are doubly miserable – they have to live in a poor kind of misery, nothing much to brag about.
So there are rich miserable people and poor miserable people. And the poor miserable people are trying their hardest to reach somehow to the status of rich miserable people. These are the only two types available. The third type has been completely forgotten. The third is your reality, and it has no misery in it.
You are asking me why man cannot drop his misery; it is for the simple reason that that’s all he has got. You want to make him even poorer? He is already poor. There are rich miserable people: he has a small, tiny misery, he cannot brag about it. And you are telling him to drop even this. Then he will be nobody; then he will be empty, a nothingness. And all the cultures, all the societies, all the religions have committed a crime against humanity: they have created a fear of nothingness, of emptiness.
The truth is that nothingness is the door to richness. Nothingness is the door to blissfulness – and the door has to be nothing. The wall is there; you cannot enter a wall, you will simply hit your head, may have some broken ribs. Why can you not enter the wall? – because the wall has no emptiness, it is solid, it objects. That’s why we call things “objects”: they are objective, they don’t allow you to pass through them, they prevent you.
A door has to be non-objective, it has to be emptiness. A door means there is nothing to prevent you. You can go in.
And because we have been conditioned that emptiness is something bad, nothingness is something bad, we are being prevented by the conditioning from dropping the misery, dropping the anguish, dropping all the suffering and just being nothing.
The moment you are nothing, you become a door – a door to the divine, a door to yourself, a door that leads to your home, a door that connects you back to your intrinsic nature. And man’s intrinsic nature is blissful.
Blissfulness is not something to be achieved. It is already there; we are born with it. We have not lost it; we have simply gone farther away, keeping our backs to ourselves. It is just behind us: a small turn and a great revolution.
But there are fake religions all over the world which are telling you that you are miserable because in the past life you committed evil acts. All nonsense – because why should existence wait for one life to punish you? There seems to be no need – in nature things happen immediately. You put your hand in the fire in this life and in the next life you will be burned? Strange! You will be burned immediately, herenow. Cause and effect are connected, there cannot be any distance.
But these fake religions go on consoling people: “Don’t be worried. Just do good acts, worship more. Go to the temple or the church, and in the next life you will not be miserable.” Nothing seems to be cash; everything is in the next life. And nobody comes back from the next life and says, “These people are telling absolute lies.” Religion is cash; it is not even a check.
Different religions have found different strategies, but the reason is the same. Christians, Jews, Mohammedans, religions born outside India say to people, “You are suffering because Adam and Eve committed a sin.” The first couple, thousands of years back… And not a great sin – you are committing it every day. They simply ate apples, and God has forbidden them to eat apples.
The question is not the apples, the question is that they disobeyed. Thousands of years ago somebody disobeyed God and he was punished, he was thrown out of the Garden of Eden, thrown out of God’s paradise. Why are we suffering? – because they were our forefathers. But strange, nobody asked these idiots – these Christians, Mohammedans, Jews, their great rabbis, popes and imams – “If that is the reason for our miseries, then why are our miseries different? Because the sin was one and single and the same, our miseries should be the same. But every man is suffering differently. His anxiety is different, his anguish is different, his problems are different – how come this variety of miseries?”
Nobody has raised the question, and they don’t have any answer if somebody asks it. If the whole of humanity were suffering the same misery there would be some logical grounds to believe that there must be a singular cause, but it is not so.
The religions that were born in India have all taken another excuse: that you are suffering because of your past lives. I used to meet Jaina monks, Buddhist monks, and ask them, “I can understand that I am suffering because of my past life, but what about the first life? There must have been a first life, in the very beginning. Why did people suffer then? They had no past life. And if they did not suffer, then the first generation of humanity lived in blissfulness; it is impossible that their children should suffer. Their children should have learned the blissfulness of their parents – children imitate. Then how did misery enter in?”
And they always said, “You, whenever you come you bring some embarrassing question. We don’t know. First life? – nobody knows what happened, when it happened.”
But I said, “Hypothetically there must have been a first life, or you have to accept another hypothesis – that this vicious circle has been going on eternally. Always there was a past life, always there was a past life. Then you cannot get out of this vicious circle, because in the next life you will suffer from this life’s acts. And then for seventy years you cannot remain a saint; even for twenty-four hours one cannot remain a saint. One needs holidays. Even your saints have holidays. And in the next life you will again commit a few evil acts…”
And what are evil acts? They are so simple it is impossible not to commit them. You see a beautiful woman; the scriptures say, “Close your eyes. Don’t see her.” But they forget completely that you close your eyes only because you have seen her! The evil act has been committed; otherwise why are you closing your eyes? You don’t close your eyes seeing an ugly woman. No scripture says, “When you see an ugly woman close your eyes.” Strange. You yourself close them without any scriptures, without any teachers, without any religions. But when you see a beautiful woman you don’t want to close your eyes, you really forget to blink – and it is natural.
Not only that – the latest scientific experiments about this phenomenon have revealed strange things. I can give you a deck of cards in which there are beautiful women, ugly women, naked women, beautiful flowers – different things on different cards. And I need not see the cards. You can go on looking at the cards, and when you come to a beautiful naked woman I can just watch your eyes and I can say, “Now you have come to a beautiful woman” – because your eyes are windows. You want to absorb that beauty more, so your eyes become wider. That is a natural mechanism.
When you go outside in the sun your eyes become smaller, the window shrinks, because the sun is too much and there is no need to take in that much light. When you come home, slowly the eyes again open to their normal size. But when you see something beautiful they become wider, wide open. It is not in your hands, it is not that you are doing it. Even a saint will have to do it because it is not a voluntary thing. It is non-voluntary, it happens on its own accord. It is biologically set up.
You have this word in English, respect. People have destroyed its meaning. It does not mean “honor” – or it means honor in a very different way than you understand. Respect means the desire to see again, re-spect – spect means seeing. If it is honor, it is honor for beauty – because you want to see it again. The woman has passed, you find some excuse to see her again, as if somebody has called you or you have forgotten something, and you turn back. These are sins.
But if to appreciate beauty is sin, then all art is sin. Then all paintings are sin, all great music is sin, all great literature is sin, and all great poetry is sin. Why confine it to women? When you look at a sunset and you are filled with the beauty of it, you are committing a sin. Or when you see a roseflower and it overpowers you with its beauty, its delicateness, you are committing a sin.
These religious people have managed such simple things so that it is impossible to get out of the wheel of life. You will be committing sins, and you will be coming back to suffer the punishment.
To eat tastefully is a sin. In Jainism – and Mahatma Gandhi has borrowed from the Jainas because Gujarat, although it is Hindu, its mind is ninety percent Jaina; Mahatma Gandhi has borrowed all five principles of the Jainas.
The first is aswad, to eat without taste. You are asking human beings to do inhuman things – it is better not to eat, and commit suicide. Even taste is not allowed! And who will tell the child, “Don’t drink the mother’s milk with taste; otherwise, finished – you have already arranged for your next life.” He enjoys the mother’s breast; in fact he enjoys so much that he remembers it again and again his whole life.
The interest of men in women’s breasts is not without any psychology. Why are all the painters, all the poets, all the sculptors making beautiful breasts? – so beautiful that really that kind of breast doesn’t exist.

I was very close to Khajuraho. I used to go there because it has the most beautiful sculpture in the whole world. And as far as breasts are concerned, Khajuraho is just at the very top; nobody anywhere in the world has been able to create such beautiful breasts. But seeing those breasts I said, “These breasts are not possible. If these breasts were there humanity would die.”
The minister of education who was showing me around said, “Why?”
I said, “Just see the roundness of the breast – the little child on this round breast… His nose will be closed, he will not be able to drink milk. Either he can drink milk or he can breathe, two alternatives are before him.”

And nature has not created those breasts for the sculptors, but for that small child. It creates breasts in such a way that the child can breathe and drink milk too. Just a completely round breast, a full moon, will kill anybody – not just the child but the child’s father also! If you cannot breathe… It is good in a sculpture.
But why is man so obsessed? In every magazine, in every poem… Somehow the breasts seem to be the central theme of all art. The reason is that the child has enjoyed the taste, the warmth, the feeling that flows from the mother’s breast – which is invisible to us, which is now being explored by scientists.
They have tried on monkeys: one monkey is given every necessary ingredient that he needs for his physical growth; no ordinary monkey gets such balanced food. The other monkey gets just ordinary food, as monkeys can get. But the other monkey has the mother’s breast, and the first monkey has just a mechanical breast. Whenever he wants to drink milk the breast is available but it is cold, the breast is just mechanical. There is no warmth, there is no human aura around it. And the scientists have found repeatedly that the child who gets perfect nourishment dies – just because he is not getting the mother’s warmth, her body. And the child that is not getting perfect nourishment lives healthily, because he is getting the mother’s warmth.
Somehow, in the psychology of man, that childhood continues. All this art is just a remembrance of a past golden time when there were no worries, no responsibilities, and life was just love.
These Jaina principles make it impossible to live. No taste, no possessions… I can understand, and I teach no-possessiveness, but I cannot understand “no possessions.” And there is a great difference between the two. You can live in a palace remembering that you are simply living in a caravanserai – it is not yours; tomorrow you will be gone, somebody else will become the possessor. One day you were not here, somebody else was the possessor.
My sannyasins have been looking for a beautiful house for me. Sixteen years ago they were also looking for a beautiful house, and I had chosen a house. Everything was settled, but there were some legal difficulties. The man didn’t have all the necessary papers in his possession, so we had to wait. But the man died. His son was not interested in selling the house. I moved to Pune.
Then I went to America. And now when my friends started looking for a house, I remembered that house. The man with whom I had talked about the house, who was the owner, has died. His son, who was against selling it, has died – now his son is in possession. But he has made many other houses around it, and destroyed the whole beauty of the place. He wants to sell all the other houses that he has made – it had a big campus, a beautiful lawn and garden. And my whole interest was in the big campus, so thousands of people could sit there under the trees on the lawn. The main house is still there – it was a beautiful house, but now it is surrounded by so many other houses it has lost its whole beauty. Its whole beauty was in those trees, the rocks, the lawn, the vast campus.
I inquired, “Who is the possessor of the house?” And when I came to know that it is now the third generation, I said, “Still people go on thinking that they possess things! They go on dying, new people go on becoming the owners.”
You should live in the world, but not let the world live in you – that’s perfectly right. But to make it a point that you should not have any possessions creates insanity. Mahavira lived naked because he could not have clothes, it would be a possession. You are asking inhuman things! There is cold, there is old age, there is sickness…
He would not sleep on a mattress – just on the bare floor. He would not cut his hair with scissors or shave his beard with razors because those are mechanical things, and he cannot possess anything. So he used to pull out his hairs: every year there was a festival time for the insane followers who would come to see the naked Mahavira pulling his hairs out. And it was thought to be a great religious ascetic discipline. But do you want the whole of humanity to do it?
The Jaina scriptures don’t mention what he was doing with his nails. I have been looking very minutely into the Jaina scriptures to find out about the nails – I am also a crazy man! Because what did he do with his nails? You cannot pull out your nails the way you pull out your hair. And if you don’t cut your nails for eighty years, you will become almost like an animal. People cannot even come close to you; your nails will reach at least six feet. They will keep everybody away, particularly women: good devices – nuclear weapons!
No, you cannot expect to get out of this vicious circle of life and death. If cause and effect are put at a distance – in one life is the cause, in another life is the effect – then it is absolutely impossible. But it is a good consolation for people, for their misery; that they had committed evil acts. What evil acts? I don’t see people committing evil acts in such a proportion that the whole humanity should be miserable.
The reality is something totally different. It is not a question of evil acts, it is a question of your having been taken away from yourself, from your natural blissfulness. And no religion wants you to be so easily blissful; otherwise what will happen to their disciplines? What will happen to their great practices, ascetic practices – people torturing themselves in a thousand and one ways. People beat themselves until they fall unconscious, and that is thought to be a religious discipline.
If dropping the misery is as easy as I say it is, then all these fake religions lose their business. It is a question of their business. Blissfulness has to be made so difficult – almost impossible – that people can only hope for it in some future life, after long arduous journeys. But I say to you, on my authority: it has happened to me so easily. I have also lived many past lives and certainly I must have committed more evil acts than any of you – because I don’t consider them to be evil acts. Appreciation of beauty, appreciation of taste, appreciation of everything that makes life more liveable, more loveable are not evil things to me.
I want you to become sensitive, aesthetically sensitive to all these things. They will make you more human, they will create more softness in you, more gratitude toward existence.
And it is not a theoretical question with me. I have just accepted nothingness as a door – which I call meditation, which is nothing but another name for nothingness. And the moment nothingness happens, suddenly you are standing face to face with yourself – all misery disappears.
The first thing you do is simply to laugh at yourself, at what an idiot you have been. That misery was never there; you were creating it with one hand and you were trying to destroy it with another hand – and naturally you were in a split, in a schizophrenic condition.
It is absolutely easy, simple. The most simple thing in existence is to be oneself. It needs no effort; you are already it – just a remembrance, just getting out of all the stupid ideas that the society has imposed on you. And that is as simple as a snake slipping out of its old skin and never even looking back. It is just an old skin.
If you understand it, it can happen this very moment, because this very moment you can see there is no misery, no anguish.
You are silent, standing on the door of nothing; just a step more inward and you have found the greatest treasure that has been waiting for you for thousands of lives.

Osho,
In the mind, in the process of thinking, there is so much energy. How can we use that energy in a creative and constructive way?
The question is very complex. It sounds simple, but it is not simple. You are asking: The mind is full of energy, how to use this energy in a creative and constructive way?
Who is going to use this energy? If mind itself is going to use this energy, it can never be creative and can never be constructive. That is what is happening all over the world. That is what is happening in science. The whole misery of science is that mind is using its energy. But mind is a negative force; it cannot use anything creatively, it needs a master. Mind is a servant. Do you have a master?
So to me the question is… Meditation brings the master in. It makes you fully aware and conscious that the mind is your instrument. Now, whatever you want to do with it you can do. And if you don’t want to do anything with it, you can put it aside; you can remain in absolute silence.
Right now you are not the master – even for five minutes. You cannot say to the mind, “Please, for five minutes, just be silent for five minutes.” Those will be the five minutes when mind will be faster, rushing more than ever – because it will have to show you who is the master.

There is a famous story in Tibet. A man wanted to learn the art of miracles, so he served a saint who was thought to be a knower of all the secrets. He served the saint day in, day out; he closed his business. The old saint told him again and again, “I don’t know anything. You are unnecessarily wasting your business, and you are becoming a burden to me because whenever I look at you… Twenty-four hours a day you are sitting here, on my head – and I don’t know any miracles. What to do?”
The man said, “You cannot avoid me so easily. I have heard that you have been hiding those secrets. But if you are stubborn, I am also stubborn. I will die sitting here, but I will learn the secret.”
Finally the saint said, “Listen. This is the mantra” – it was not much, it was a simple mantra – “Just repeat ‘Om, om, omkar’ and all the secrets of all the miracles will be available to you as you become more and more attuned with the mantra.”
The man rushed toward his home. While he was going down the steps of the temple the saint said, “Wait! I have forgotten one thing. After taking the bath, when you are sitting to chant the mantra, remember not to let any monkey enter into your mind.”
That man said, “You must be getting senile! In my whole life no monkey has ever entered into my mind. Don’t be worried.”
He said, “I am not worried. It is just to make you aware, so you don’t come later on and tell me that a monkey disturbed everything.”
The man said, “There is no fear about the monkeys. Everything has entered into this mind, but a monkey? I don’t remember this at all, not even in a dream.”
But as he started moving toward his house he was amazed; monkeys started appearing on the screen of his mind – big monkeys, giggling. He said, “My God!” He tried to push them away, “Get out! Get lost! I don’t have anything to do with monkeys, and particularly today!” But he was surprised that it was not one monkey, it was a vast line; they were coming from all sides.
He said, “My God, I had never thought that so many monkeys are hidden in my mind. But first let me take a bath.” But it was so difficult to take a bath because he was continually shouting “Get out! Get lost!”
Finally his wife knocked on the door – “What is the matter? Who is inside the bathroom? Are you alone?”
He said, “I am alone.”
“But then why are you shouting so loudly: ‘Get out, get lost’?”
He said, “About these monkeys…”
The woman said, “You have gone mad. What monkeys? There are no monkeys here, keep quiet.”
He said, “Strange. This woman has never been so hard on me, but in a way she is right because there is nobody in the bathroom. But to say that they are in my head looks even worse.”
He sat down in his worshipping place, but the monkeys were inside. He closed his eyes – they were sitting all around him. He said, “I have never thought that monkeys are so interested in me. Why are you bothering me? A few are inside the mind, and if I close my mind, a few are sitting all around me. They push me from this side and from that side, and giggling! I am a silent man, and this is not gentlemanly behavior.”
And again the wife looked into his worshipping place and she said, “With whom are you talking?”
He said, “My God, now I have to explain something which I do not understand myself. Just don’t you disturb me tonight. Tomorrow morning I will go and I will see that old man.”
The whole night he took showers many times, rubbed the soap as much as he could to clean himself, but there was no way. In fact the bathroom was so full of monkeys that to make his way into the bathroom was difficult, to come out of the bathroom was difficult. And when he came back to his worshipping place they were sitting all over – even in his place a big monkey was sitting chanting “Om, om, om.”
That man said, “I cannot wait for morning.” It was midnight. He rushed to the temple, woke up the old man and told him, “What kind of mantra have you given to me?”
He said, “I have told you; that was the condition. That’s why I have not told it to anybody for so many years – because that condition is unfulfillable. Simply drop this idea of miracles and the monkeys will disappear.”
The man said, “Just… I have come for that. I don’t want any miracles, I don’t want any secrets. Please just help me to get rid of these monkeys because they are sitting all over the place, and if I open my shop tomorrow they will be sitting all over the shop. I am a poor businessman. I got into the wrong business; this is not my business. You do your business but please, if you can help me…”
The saint said, “There is no problem. If you drop the idea of miracles, those monkeys will disappear. They are the guardians of the miracles.”

If you try for even five minutes to stop thinking, more thoughts than ever will rush in – simply to show you that you are not the master. So first one has to get the mastery, and the way to become the master is not to say to the thoughts, “Stop.” The way to become the master is to watch the whole thought process. If the man had simply watched the monkeys, had allowed them to giggle, had allowed them to do whatsoever they were doing; if he had been simply a witness, those monkeys would have gone – seeing that this man seemed to be absolutely indifferent, not interested at all.
Your thoughts have to understand one thing: that you are not interested in them. The moment you have made this point you have attained a tremendous victory. Just watch. Don’t say anything to the thoughts. Don’t judge. Don’t condemn. Don’t tell them to move. Let them do whatsoever they are doing, let them do any gymnastics; simply watch, enjoy. It is just a beautiful film. And you will be surprised: just watching, a moment comes when thoughts are not there, there is nothing to watch.
This is the door I have been calling nothingness, emptiness. From this door enters your real being, the master. And that master is absolutely positive; in its hands everything turns into gold.
If Albert Einstein had been a meditator, the same mind would have produced atomic energy not to destroy Hiroshima and Nagasaki but to help the whole of humanity to raise its standard of living. Without meditation the mind is negative, it is bound to be in the service of death. With meditation the master is there, and the master is absolute positiveness. In its hands the same mind, the same energy, becomes creative, constructive, life affirmative.
So you cannot do anything directly with the mind. You will have to take a little roundabout way; first you have to bring the master in.
The master is missing, and for centuries the servant has been thinking he is the master. Just let the master come in, and the servant immediately understands. Just the presence of the master and the servant falls at the feet of the master and waits for any order, for anything the master wants to be done – he is ready.
The mind is a tremendously powerful instrument. No computer is as powerful as man’s mind – cannot be, because it is made by man’s mind. Nothing can be, because they are all made by man’s mind. A single man’s mind has such immense capacity: in a small skull, such a small brain can contain all the information contained in all the libraries of the earth, and that information is not a small amount.
Just one library, the British Library, has so many books that if we put those books in a line side by side they will go three times around the earth. And a bigger library exists in Moscow, a similar library exists in Harvard, and there are similar libraries in all the big universities of the world. But a single human mind can contain all the information contained in all these libraries. Scientists are agreed that we may not be able to make a computer comparable to the human mind which can be put into such a small space.
But the result of this immense gift to man has not been beneficial – because the master is absent and the servant is running the show. The result is wars, violence, murders, rape. Man is living in a nightmare, and the only way out is to bring the master in. It is there – you just have to get hold of it. And watchfulness is the key: just watch the mind. The moment there are no thoughts, immediately you will be able to see yourself – not as mind, but as something beyond, something transcendental to mind.
And once you are attuned with the transcendental then the mind is in your hands. It can be immensely creative. It can make this very earth a paradise. There is no need for any paradise to be searched for above in the clouds, just as there is no need to search for any hell – because we have already created hell. We are living in it.

I have heard that a great politician died. Naturally, he was afraid that he would be taken to hell. He knew his whole life: it was absolutely criminal and nothing else.
Without crimes it is impossible to succeed in getting political power. In going higher on the ladder of power you have to crush, kill, destroy – you have to do everything. But if you succeed then you are forgiven. Nobody remembers that you have done anything wrong. And he was a successful politician. But as he was dying he was afraid; he remembered his whole past, and he was certain “I am going to hell. Now nothing can help. Those political tricks will not be helpful here.”
But when he opened his eyes he was in front of heaven. He could not believe it. He asked the angels who had brought him there, “There seems to be some mistake, some bureaucratic mistake. This is heaven and you have brought me here?”
“This is, certainly. And there is no mistake, you have earned it.”
The man said, “What are you talking about? I have done everything wrong that can be done.”
They said, “We know, but your whole life you lived in hell, and now to send you to hell again will not be justified. Moreover, our hell will look very old-fashioned. You have been living in a very ultra-modern hell, and we don’t want to feel ashamed. Our hell is very ancient, our methods of torture are very ancient, and you have refined everything so well that in fact you will laugh – ‘Is this hell?’ So the only way… Even God was puzzled. You are three days late. You must have died three days ago, but it took three days for God to make the decision about where to take you. Finally we decided, ‘It is better to take him to heaven, because hell he has lived enough.’”

People still go on thinking that hell is somewhere down underneath the earth – and you are living in it, this is the beauty – and heaven is somewhere above.
You can change this hell into heaven if your mind can be under the guidance of the master, of your self-nature. And it is a simple process. But don’t try directly with the mind; otherwise you will be getting into trouble. One can even get into insanity. If you try to put your mind energy into creative directions, if you are not capable even of stopping it for one moment and you are trying to put it into a creative dimension, you will go crazy. You will have a nervous breakdown.
Don’t touch the mind. First just find out where the master is. It is a complicated mechanism. Let the master be there, and the mind functions as a servant so perfectly.
In the East we have done this. Gautam Buddha could have become Albert Einstein without any difficulty – he has a far greater genius. But his whole life was concerned with transforming people, with awareness, with compassion, with love, with blissfulness.

============================================================

Osho,
I have no idea about what “right awareness” is. How to judge that I am going in the right direction?
There is no right awareness, because there is no possibility of wrong awareness. Awareness is right. So first drop the wrong question. Once you are asking a wrong question to yourself you cannot get the right answer.
Don’t ask what is right awareness. Simply ask what is awareness. Your question gives the fallacious impression that you know what awareness is, that the only thing that you don’t know is what is right awareness and what is not right awareness. Erase that fallacy completely from your mind.
Awareness is simple, very innocent. Everyone has it, so it is not a question of achievement. One wrong question leads to another wrong question: first you ask what right awareness is, then you ask how to achieve it. You already have it. When you see the sunset, are you not aware? When you see a roseflower, are you not aware? You are aware of the beautiful sunset, you are aware of the beautiful rose; all that is needed is that you become aware of your awareness, too. That is the only thing that has to be added, the only refinement.
You are aware of objects. You have to be aware of your subjectivity. When you are looking at a sunset, you are so absorbed in the beauty of the sunset that you completely forget that there is a greater beauty which is making it possible for you to know the beauty of the sunset – it is your awareness. But your awareness is focused on an object – the sunset, the sunrise, the moon. Drop the object and just remain engulfed in pure awareness, in silence, in peace. Just be alert.
I am reminded of one of the most beautiful stories that I have come across in my life:

A king in Japan sent his son to a mystic, to a master, to learn awareness. The king was old. And he said to the son, “Put your total energy into it because unless you are aware, you are not going to succeed me. I will not give this kingdom to a man who is asleep and unconscious. It is not a question of father and son – my father has given it to me only when I attained awareness. I was not the right person because I was not his eldest son, I was his youngest son. But my other two brothers, who were older than me, could not attain.
“The same is going to happen to you. And the problem is even more complicated because I have only one son: if you do not attain to awareness, the kingdom is going into somebody else’s hands. You will be a beggar on the streets. So it is a question of life and death for you. Go to this man; he has been my master. Now he is very old, but I know that if anybody can teach you, he is the man. Tell him, ‘My father is sick, old, can die any day. Time is short, and I have to become fully aware before he dies; otherwise I lose the kingdom.’” A very symbolic story too: if you are not aware, you lose the kingdom.
The king’s son went to the old master in the mountains. He said to the master, “I have been sent by your disciple, the king.”
The master was very old, older than his father. He said, “I remember that man. He was really an authentic seeker. I hope you will prove to be of the same quality, of the same genius, of the same totality, of the same intensity.”
The young prince said, “I will do everything.”
The master said, “Then start cleaning in the commune. And remember one thing – that I will be hitting you at any time. You may be cleaning the floor and I may come from the back and hit you with my stick, so be alert.”
He said, “But I have come to learn about awareness.”
The master said, “This is how you will learn.”
One year passed. In the beginning he was getting so many hits every day, but slowly, slowly he started becoming aware. Even the footsteps of the old man… He might be doing anything – howsoever absorbed in the work, he would become immediately aware that the master was around. The prince would be ready. After one year the master hit him from the back while he was deeply involved in talking with another inmate of the ashram. But the prince continued to talk and still he caught hold of the stick before the stick could reach his body.
The master said, “That’s right. Now this is the end of the first lesson. The second lesson begins from tonight.”
The prince said, “I used to think that this was all. This is only the first lesson? How many lessons are there?”
The old man said, “It depends on you. The second lesson is that now I will be hitting you while you are asleep, and you have to be alert in your sleep.”
He said, “My God. How can one be alert in sleep?”
The old man said, “Don’t be worried. Thousands of my disciples have passed through the test. Your father has passed through the test. It is not impossible. It is difficult, but it is a challenge.”
And from that night he was getting hit six times, eight times, twelve times in the night. Sleep was difficult. But within six months he started feeling inside himself a certain awareness. And one day when the master was just going to hit him, with closed eyes he said – “Don’t bother. You are too old. It hurts me; you are taking so much trouble. I am young, I can survive these hits.”
The master said, “You are blessed. You have passed the second lesson. But up to now I have been hitting with my wooden staff. The third lesson is that now, from tomorrow morning, I will start hitting with a real sword. Be alert! Just a moment of unconsciousness and you are finished.”
Early in the morning the master used to sit in the garden, just listening to the birds singing, the flowers opening, the sun rising. The prince thought, “Now it is becoming dangerous! A wooden stick was hard, difficult, but it was not going to kill me. A real sword…” He was a swordsman but he was not given any chance to protect himself; only awareness was going to be his protection.
An idea came to his mind: “This old man is really dangerous. Before he starts his third lesson, I would like to check whether he himself can pass the third test or not. If he is putting my life at risk, I cannot allow him to do it without checking whether he is worthy of it or not.” And these were only thoughts that he was thinking lying down in his bed; it was a cold morning.
And the master said, “Come out of your blanket, you idiot! Do you want to hit your own master with a sword? Feel ashamed! I can hear the footsteps of your thoughts. Drop the idea.” He had heard. Nothing was said to him, nothing was done to him.
Thoughts are also things. Thoughts also, while moving, make sounds, and those who are fully alert can read your thoughts. Even before you have become aware of them, they can become aware of them.
The prince was really ashamed. He fell at the feet of the master and he said, “Just forgive me. I am really stupid.”
But because it was a question of a sword, a real sword, he became aware of everything around him, even his own breathing, his heartbeat. Just a small breeze passing through the leaves, a dead leaf moving in the wind, and he was aware.
The master tried a few times but found him always ready. He could not hit him with the sword because he could not find him unconscious, unalert. He was just alertness. It was a question of death – you cannot afford to be anything but alert.
In three days’ time the master could not find a single moment, a single loophole. And after the third day he called him and told him, “Now you can go and tell your father – and this is the letter from me – that the kingdom is yours.”

Awareness is a process of being more and more awake.
Whatever you are doing, you can do it like a robot, mechanically. Just watch: the way you are walking, is it alert or just a mechanical habit?

A man was brought to me and he was really in a great mess because he was a professor and he walked like a woman – which is a miracle. It is not easy to walk like a woman, because to walk like a woman you need a womb. Only the womb helps you to move in a certain way, otherwise you cannot. But by some freak of nature he was walking this way from his very childhood. And because everybody was laughing and telling him that this was bad, he was trying hard not to move like that. But the more he made the effort, the more it became impossible. It became a deep-rooted habit.
He was a talented person, a good teacher. And in the university he was a laughingstock wherever he would go. Whoever would see him walking was bound to laugh – “Look at this man!” He was given psychoanalytic treatment, he was taken to other therapists; nothing worked. Somebody suggested me. His parents brought him to me and I said, “Do one thing. In front of me, consciously, try to walk like a woman.”
He said, “What are you saying? That is my problem!”
I said, “Forget the problem. Simply walk in front of me, with full consciousness, with as much grace as possible, like a woman.”
He looked at his parents. He said, “Where have you brought me? I want to get rid of it, and this man seems to be a trainer!”
But the parents said, “There is no harm, just try. Who knows? He has some secret idea behind it – try.”
Forced, he tried – and he could not walk like a woman because now he was trying to walk consciously. He was surprised, he could not believe it. He said, “My whole life I was trying not to walk like a woman but it was an unconscious effort, because people were laughing.”
I told him, “If you want to get rid of it, wherever you go remember: you have to walk consciously like a woman. In the university, in the city, in any club – wherever you go, walk consciously like a woman.”
After three years he met me and he said, “In these three years it has not happened. I have been trying my best.”
I said, “Go on trying, because in that very effort is your alertness.”

People come to me – they want to drop smoking and they have tried thousands of times. And again, after a few hours the urge is so much their whole body, their whole nervous system is asking for the nicotine. Then they forget all the religious teachings that “You will fall into hell.” They are ready, because who knows whether hell exists or not? But right now they can’t live in this hell; they can’t think of anything else but cigarettes.
I have told these people, “Don’t stop smoking. Smoke consciously, lovingly, gracefully; enjoy it as much as you can. While you are destroying your lungs, why not destroy them as beautifully and gracefully as possible? And these are your lungs; it is nobody else’s business. And I promise you there is no hell – because you have not harmed anybody, you have just harmed yourself; and you have paid for it. You are not stealing cigarettes, you are paying for them. Why should you go to hell? You are suffering already.”
Somebody is suffering from tuberculosis. The doctors are telling somebody, “Stop; otherwise cancer is absolutely certain to happen to you, you are preparing the ground.” What more hell? But when you have decided to do it and when you cannot restrain yourself from doing it, then do it aesthetically, consciously, religiously. They will listen to me and will think, “This man must be mad. What is he saying – religiously?”
And I will teach them how to take the packet from the pocket consciously, slowly. Open the packet, take the cigarette consciously – watch, look around. It is such a beautiful thing! You love it so much, you should give it a little time, little attention. Then light it; watch the smoke, be alert as the smoke goes inside you. You are doing a great job: pure air is available free; to pollute it you are wasting money, hard-earned – enjoy it to the full. The warmth of the smoke, the smoke going in, the coughing – be alert! Make beautiful rings, they all go toward heaven. You cannot go to hell; even your smoke is going to heaven, how can you go to hell? Just enjoy it. And I forced them: “Do it in front of me so I can be satisfied.”
They will say, “It looks so awkward. It looks so stupid, what you are saying.”
I said, “This is the only way, if you want one day to be free from this urge.” And they will do it, and they will say to me, “This is strange, that for the first time I was only a watcher. I was not smoking – perhaps the mind, perhaps the body – but I was simply watching it.”
I said, “You have got the key. Now be watchful, and smoke as much as you can because the more you smoke the more watchful you will be. Smoke in the day, smoke in the night, in the middle of the night when you wake up. Don’t miss the chance, smoke. Don’t bother about your doctors, your wife; don’t bother about anybody. Just take care of one thing: remain alert. Make it an art.”
And hundreds of people have found that the urge disappeared. The cigarette is gone, the cigar is gone. Even the desire… Looking back, they cannot believe that they were in such bondage. And the only key to get out of the imprisonment was awareness. You have the awareness; it is just that you have not applied it. So apply it so it becomes more and more sharp. Without application it has gathered dust.
In any act – walking, eating, drinking – whatever you are doing, make it a point that side by side a current of awareness will always remain running. And your whole life will start having a religious fragrance.
And all awareness is right, and all unawareness is wrong.

Osho,
The mind warns me that it will cease helping me to feel that I fit with society, and will expose the feelings of guilt within me if I choose to go the way of awareness. It also gives convincing arguments about going for truth and taking risks, but I don't really have the guts to face unpleasantness. Osho, can you comment?
Your question has many implications. The first is: everybody has guts. You are not allowed to use them from the very beginning. The whole society wants to make you a coward. Cowards are very much needed because the society is interested in making you slaves.
Your parents are interested that you should be obedient – your guts may not allow you to be obedient. Your teachers want you to accept everything that is said by them without any questioning – your guts may raise questions. Your priests want you to believe, to have faith – your guts may create doubts. All the vested interests are against the courageousness which is naturally part of your being.
Nobody is born a coward. Cowards are manufactured. Every child is brave. I have not come across a single child who is not brave. What happens? Where does this quality disappear?
The same child, when he comes out of the university, is a coward. Your whole teaching, your whole religion, your whole society, all your relationships – the husband does not want the wife to have guts; neither does the wife want the husband to have guts. Everyone wants to dominate everybody else. Naturally, the other person should be reduced to a coward. It is a very strange phenomenon that a woman will destroy the courageousness of her husband. And then she cannot love the man, because a woman loves courage.
We have made life so complicated. We are living in such an unconscious way. No woman wants her husband to be a coward, but every woman is going to reduce him to a coward. Then she is caught in a dilemma: she wants her husband to be a hero, but a hero outside the house, not inside the house. But this is not possible. Inside the house he has to function like a mouse, and outside the house he has to function like a lion. And people are managing, and everybody knows everybody’s story – because it is the same story.
Parents are very happy with an obedient child. I have never been an obedient child – and my family was a joint family, a big family; uncles, aunts, so many people under one roof. Whenever there would be guests or important people they would try to send me out. They would tell me, “Go, anywhere!” They would introduce other children who were obedient – my brothers, my sisters – and I would come exactly at the right time to introduce myself to the guest: “These people are forgetting; I am the eldest – and there is a code language between these people and me.”
My father would look here and there, “Now what?”
And the person was bound to ask, “What code language?”
I said, “The code language is, that whenever I might have to introduce myself these people send me out. That means certainly somebody is coming, somebody important enough – and naturally, I have to come in the middle, at the right time, to introduce myself. These people don’t have guts to introduce me.”
What was their problem? Their problem was that everybody was obedient. They would say, “It is night” and the children would say, “It is night.” And I would see that it was not night, it was day. Now there were only two ways: either to listen to my own intelligence, or to be respected, honored as an obedient child.

There was a small piece of land between my house and a temple. Legally, my father had all the papers of the land. Technically, in the courts, he was going to win the case. But in reality the land belonged to the temple; it was just because of the stupidity of the priest that he gave all his papers to my father. I knew the whole story, and when the case started I told my father, “I am coming to the court to tell the reality: technically you have the papers in your hand, but in reality the land belongs to the temple. I will not allow you to win the case.” I was not more than thirteen. So I said, “Perhaps the court may not accept me because I am not yet adult, so I have persuaded my grandfather – I am bringing him with me.”
My father said, “You should not interfere in these things. You should concentrate on your studies, go to school.”
I said, “I am doing those things, but whatever else is happening… If I see that something wrong is going to happen, I am the last person not to interfere. Withdraw the case.”
I brought my grandfather and I told my father, “You can ask your father too. Your son is against you, your father is against you, because we both know what the truth is.”
And then my grandfather said, “However disobedient he may be, however rebellious he may be, what he is saying is true and I am going with him. Withdraw the case otherwise you will lose the case and lose face too, because your son will be testifying in the court against you, your father will be testifying against you in the court.”
He had to withdraw the case and give the land to the temple.
He was angry for many days. I said, “There is no need to be angry. You should be happy that you have a son who has guts, even against you. If it is a question of truth, he will choose the truth; he will not go with you. You can depend on me. And rather than rejoicing, you are being angry.” But this is how things are.

In my school, to wear a cap was compulsory. I don’t have anything against the cap, I love it – but because it was compulsory I went the first day without a cap. The teacher said, “It is the first day; perhaps you don’t know, the cap is compulsory. Without a cap you cannot come to the school.”
I said, “I am going to come to the school. When I was admitted there was no condition that I have to come with a cap. I can even come naked and you cannot prevent me. I have been admitted, not my clothes.”
The teacher said, “You seem to be crazy. Naked?”
I said, “Yes, tomorrow.”
He took me immediately to the principal. He said, “You tackle him, he seems to be very strange. I have just asked him to bring a cap because the cap is necessary.”
The principal said, “What is the trouble? Why are you not complying with a certain rule, a discipline?”
I said, “I am ready to follow any discipline which is based on reason, not compulsion. You will have to prove that the cap has something to do with intelligence. As far as I know… In India the Bengalis don’t use a cap and they have the best intelligence in the country. And the Punjabis have the worst intelligence, if they have it at all. You have to prove it to me. I have come to the school to be more intelligent, to be more rational, to be more mature. In what way is your cap going to help me?
“And what precedent is there? Gautam Buddha had no cap, Mahavira had no cap, Krishna had no cap. Why should I be forced into something which has no meaning? Tell me the meaning and I will follow it. But I cannot follow anything compulsory. Who are you to make a rule without understanding the psychology of the rule? Why are you using the cap? Has it helped you in any way?”
The principal said, “We never had anybody raise such questions. Can you please give me some time to think it over?”
I said, “I can give you as much time as you want. I will be seven years in this school, without a cap. And I don’t know – it can become a movement. Others” – there were two thousand students – “may start dropping their caps, I don’t know. If they have any intelligence they should.”
By the time I left the school the cap had disappeared because he never could find the answer.
And the day I left the school… I went to the university, and came back after one year to visit my village. The cap was back, compulsory. I went to the principal; I said, “This is absolute ugliness. You could not answer me. For seven years two thousand students did not use the cap; you could not prevent it. And now that I have left the school, the cap is back – because these people don’t ask questions, they are simply obedient because it is a rule. But you should have at least this much responsibility, that if you cannot prove anything in support of a certain rule, the rule should be removed. But you have been cunning” – as if he was waiting somehow till I got out of the school.

Those seven years must have been long – because it was not only one thing, there were a thousand other things in those seven years. But I have never been mischievous. If I disobeyed anything I had reasons to disobey, and I was ready to obey it if I was convinced intelligently.
But the whole society kills your guts. So this is the first thing about your question: drop this idea that you don’t have guts. You have been told again and again that you don’t have guts, and you have believed it. It is only a question of dropping a certain conditioning and you will find a tremendous upsurge of energy which is repressed in you – and that energy will be needed for the transformation.
Second thing: you say, “My mind says that if you go in search of truth, if you meditate, if you become a seeker, you will not fit with the society.” The mind is not saying anything wrong. The mind is simply saying something factual; you will not fit in the society. But to fit in the society is not a value. Only idiots fit. The more you have intelligence the more you are unfit.
All great artists, scientists, philosophers, mystics, poets, painters – they are all misfits. And to find a man who is a misfit is to find a man of beauty, of courage, of intelligence, a man who is ready to stand alone against the whole world. The very situation brings out the best in him.
He functions at the highest level of being, he functions at the optimum – he has to function because the whole world is against him. He is alone facing the whole world; he cannot afford to be lousy, to be sleepy. He cannot afford to be middle class. He has to sharpen his intelligence, sharpen his being. This fight between him and the world is going to give him tremendous qualities.
In the whole history of man you can count on your fingers the names of those who have fought against the world. And the very fight has made them a light unto themselves.
If you want to fit with the world you have to compromise, and all compromise is wrong. It is ugly, it is unspiritual, it is against your own self. All compromise, without exception, degrades your humanity, humiliates you. The man of no compromise has an integrity. You can kill him but you cannot kill his spirit. You can destroy him but you cannot destroy his vision, his truth.

Socrates was ordered to be killed by poisoning, and the chief justice who gave the order was feeling guilty – because Socrates was an innocent man. His only crime was that he was himself and he would not compromise. And in a good world, in a better world, in a more human world, this should be one of the best qualities of man: not to compromise. Those who are ready to compromise will not be counted as human beings, but as cattle.
The chief justice was feeling a little guilty. So he said to Socrates, “Because of the majority of the judges” – and it was not much of a majority, only one man’s majority – “we have to give you poison.”
Socrates said, “You need not feel guilty, because you are not killing me, you are killing yourself. Let me remind you that your name will be remembered only because you ordered Socrates to be poisoned; you have not done anything else in your life. My name will continue to be remembered as long as man has the urge, the desire to know the truth, to know himself, to know the mysteries of existence. You cannot kill me. You are simply killing yourself, and you are condemning yourself before the whole of mankind that is going to come.” And his prophecy has proved right.

Your mind says you will become a misfit. And on the other hand, your mind insists and convinces you that unless you go on the search for truth, your life is a wastage. So you are in a difficulty, because you don’t understand the nature of the mind.
The nature of the mind is dialectical, it is opposed to itself. On each and every point, mind is never unanimous – it cannot be. By its very nature it is always divided, a house divided against itself. So on the one hand it will say one thing, on the other hand it will say just its opposite. And this is how mind creates tension, this is how mind creates anxiety, this is how mind creates anguish. You cannot do anything. If you do one thing the other part says, “What are you doing? You will become a misfit.” If you listen to this part, thinking that “I don’t want to be unfit, I am not ready to be crucified or to be poisoned or to be stoned to death,” then the other part says, “You are not man enough. You are a coward.” You can neither go this way nor you can go that way. You are always on the crossroads, and the mind says all kinds of things.
It is simple that you have presented only two sides; mind can say many things contradicting each other, and supporting each with reasoning. That’s how people go mad. Mind is the ground of madness, where madness grows. It is where one becomes schizophrenic. For example your question can create schizophrenia in you – whatever you do will be wrong because the other part will go on teasing you, “Listen. You are going wrong. You will become unfit. Then don’t tell me that I did not warn you, I told you everything beforehand. Don’t be stupid. Come back!” If you go back, the other part starts saying, “So after all you are a coward, no guts, afraid of being a misfit. Then what is the point of your living? If you cannot even search the truth of your own being, what is the point of your living?” This is the situation of the mind about every question.

I was a student, and the man who had founded the university, Harisingh Gaur, was still the vice-chancellor. We became friends, because I used to go for a morning walk on a lonely street early in the morning before sunrise and he also used to go on the same street, alone. We were the only persons, so naturally… It started with saying “Good morning” to each other. By and by we started walking together. He started asking about me, what subject I was studying, what I was doing, and slowly, slowly the distance of age disappeared. He started inviting me for tea after the walk. And he became interested in my ideology, because whenever I saw that he was saying something which I could not accept I simply rejected it and produced every possible argument against it. He loved it.
He said, “You should not have joined philosophy.” He himself was a legal man, he was a world-famous law expert. He said, “You should have gone into law because you, without knowing law, argue with me and I can see that if we were in a court you would win.”
But I said to him, “It is just a mind game. I can argue for, I can argue against; mind is ready for both.”
He said, “Strange… That reminds me of one of the incidents in my own life.” He was fighting a very big case in the Privy Council for the Maharaja of Jaipur. But he was a drunkard, and the night before he must have drunk too much at a party. So the hangover was there, and he forgot which party he was a counselor for. In the Privy Council he started arguing against the Maharaja of Jaipur.
The maharaja could not believe it. Doctor Gaur’s assistant was pulling at his coat, but he would not listen, he would take his coat back… He was finishing the maharaja completely, and he was supposed to fight for him! And the other party, the Maharaja of Udaipur, was also puzzled; he was not leaving anything for them. Their counsel was also worried about what he was going to say: “This man is mad, he’s drunk, but he is giving beautiful arguments.”
But as lunchtime came he became a little more sober. He came out; his assistant said – and the Maharaja of Jaipur had tears in his eyes – he said, “What have you done?”
Doctor Gaur said, “What is the matter? Everybody looks as if something strange has happened.”
The maharaja said, “What can be more strange? We have hired you and you are arguing against us. You have finished our case.”
He said, “Don’t be worried, there is still time. After the lunch hour I will see.”
After the lunch hour he started by saying, “Whatever I have said before the lunch hour was just preparing the ground: these are the arguments my opponents may produce. Now I am going to argue against each argument that I made before the lunch hour.” And by the evening he had destroyed all the arguments that he had produced before the lunch hour.
When the privy council chief asked the Udaipur maharaja’s counsel, “Do you want to say anything?” he said, “There is nothing left, because all that I could say he said it better, and he has already destroyed it. The case is over.” Doctor Harisingh Gaur was victorious in the case.
And he said to me, “I can understand that mind is a prostitute. It has no devotion to anything – whoever pays more, it is ready to go with the person.”

Your question cannot be solved within the mind. Whatever you do, the mind keeps a balance. If you increase arguments on one side, the mind will increase the arguments on the other side, and there will always remain a balance. Inside the mind there is no solution. But if you can get out of the mind and just be a witness that is the solution. The mind disappears with all its dialectics, with all its dualisms.
Watching the mind, being aware of the mind – without choosing any side, choicelessly being aware – that is the secret. And slowly, slowly mind subsides, and there is immense emptiness. In that emptiness you will find the way.
I cannot give you the way, nobody can give you the way. Only your emptiness, only your nothingness becomes the way. Nothingness instead of mind is the way.
If you remain in the mind you can only go mad – that is the ultimate possibility, the ultimate evolution of the mind. If you don’t want to go mad, then you will remain simply middle class. And by middle class, I mean compromising here, compromising there, a little bit listening to this part, a little bit listening to that part – shattered in fragments, never having an individuality, never having a soul.
So don’t try to find an answer within the mind. That’s where the whole philosophy of the world is engaged, without any conclusion; thousands of years of discussions, arguments, and no conclusion at all. And the people who have simply moved out of the mind have immediately arrived to the conclusion.
Mind is not the way. No-mind is the way. Mind leads to madness. No-mind leads to ultimate buddhahood, ultimate awakening.

============================================================

Osho,
Why can a man not become meditative? How can a movement for meditation be created?
Meditation is a danger, it is a risk. It is a danger to all the vested interests, and it is a risk to the mind. Mind and meditation cannot coexist. There is no question of having both of them. Either you can have mind or you can have meditation, because mind is thinking and meditation is silence.
Mind is groping in the dark for the door.
Meditation is seeing. There is no question of groping, it knows the door.
Mind thinks. Meditation knows. This is a very fundamental reason why man cannot become meditative – or why very few men have dared to become meditative. Our training is of the mind. Our education is for the mind. Our ambitions, our desires, can only be fulfilled by the mind. You can become president of a country, prime minister, not by being meditative but by cultivating a very cunning mind. The whole education is geared by your parents, by your society, so that you can fulfill your desires, your ambitions. You want to become somebody.
Meditation can only make you a nobody. Who wants to become a nobody? Everybody wants to go on higher on the ladder of ambitions. People sacrifice their whole life to become somebody.

Alexander was coming to India. A madness had entered in his mind: he wanted to conquer the whole world. Everybody has a little bit of that kind of madness, but he had the whole chunk. And while he was coming toward India, passing the boundaries of Greece, somebody said to him, “You have been asking many times about a mystic, a very strange man, Diogenes. He lives nearby. If you want to see him, it is a few minutes’ walk, just by the side of the river.”
Diogenes was certainly a very strange kind of man. In fact if you are a man you are going to be a strange kind of man, because you are going to be something unique. He lived naked; he was one of the most beautiful men possible. But he always used to have a lighted lamp in his hand – day or night, it made no difference. Even in the day, in the full light of the sun, he was holding his lamp while walking on the streets. People used to laugh at him, and used to ask him, “Why are you carrying this lamp, unnecessarily wasting the oil and becoming a laughingstock?”
And Diogenes used to say, “I have to keep it, because I am looking for the authentic, real man. I have not yet come across him. I come across people but they are all wearing masks, they are all hypocrites.”
He had a great sense of humor. To me, that is one of the most important qualities of a genuine religious man. While he was dying, he still kept his lamp by his side. Somebody asked Diogenes, “You are dying. Let us know about the man you were searching for. Your life is ending; have you been successful in finding the authentic man?”
He was almost on the verge of death, but he opened his eyes and said, “No, I could not find the authentic man. But I am happy that nobody has stolen my lamp yet – because all around there are thieves, criminals, all kinds of robbers, and I am a naked, unprotected man. This gives me great hope: I carried the lamp my whole life and nobody has stolen it yet. This gives me great hope that someday the man will be born whom I have been looking for; perhaps I have come too soon.” And he died.
So Alexander had heard and had loved many stories about him. He said, “I would like to go.” It was early morning, the sun was rising. Diogenes was lying on the sand on the bank of the river, taking a sunbath. Alexander felt a little awkward, because Diogenes was naked. He also felt embarrassed, because this was the first time that somebody had continued to lie down in front of him – “Perhaps the man does not know who I am.” So he said, “Perhaps you are unaware of the person who has come to meet you.”
Diogenes laughed. He also used to have a dog. That was his only companion. Asked why he had made a dog a friend, he said, “Because I could not find a man worth making a friend.” He looked at the dog who was sitting by his side and said, “Listen to what this stupid man is saying. He is saying I do not know who he is. The fact is, he himself does not know who he is. Now what to do with such idiots? You tell me.”
Shocked… But it was a fact. Still, Alexander tried to make some conversation. He bypassed the insult. He said, “I am Alexander the Great.”
Diogenes said, “My God.” And he looked at the dog and said, “Did you hear?” – that was his constant habit, to refer to the dog: “Did you hear? This man thinks himself the greatest man in the world. And that is a sure sign of an inferiority complex. Only people who suffer from inferiority pretend to be great: the greater the inferiority the more they start projecting themselves higher, bigger, vaster.”
But he said to Alexander, “What is the point of your coming to me? – a poor man, a nobody, whose only possession is a lamp, whose only companion in this whole world is a dog, who lives naked… What have you come here for?”
Alexander said, “I have heard many stories about you, and now I can see that all those stories are bound to be real – you are a man, certainly strange, but in a way immensely beautiful. I am just going to conquer the world, and I heard that you are just residing here. I could not resist the temptation to come and see.”
Diogenes said, “You have seen me. Now don’t waste time, because life is short and the world is big – you may die before you conquer it. And have you ever considered… If you succeed in conquering this world, what are you going to do next? – because there is no other world than this. You will simply look foolish. And can I ask you, why are you taking so much trouble conquering the world? You call me strange – who is just having a beautiful sunbath – and you don’t think yourself strange, stupidly strange, that you are on your way to conquer the world, for what? What will you do when you have conquered the world?”
Alexander said, “I have never thought about it, to be frank with you. Perhaps I will relax and rest when I have conquered the world.”
Diogenes turned to the dog and said, “Do you hear? This man is mad. He is seeing me already resting, relaxing – without conquering a thing! And he will relax when he has conquered the whole world.”
Alexander felt ashamed. There was truth, so clear, so crystal clear – if you want to rest and relax, you can rest and relax now. Why postpone it for tomorrow? You are postponing it for an indefinite time. And meanwhile you will have to conquer the whole world, as if conquering the whole world is a necessary step in being relaxed and finding a restful life.
Alexander said, “I can understand; I am looking foolish before you. Can I do anything for you? I have really fallen in love with you. I have seen great kings, great generals, but I have never seen such a courageous man as you, who has not even moved, who has not even said ‘Good morning.’ Who has not bothered about me – on the contrary, who goes on talking to his dog! I can do anything, because the whole world is in my hands. Just say, and I will do it for you.”
Diogenes said, “Really? Then just do one thing: stand a little away from me, because you are blocking the sun. I am taking a sunbath, and you don’t understand even simple manners.”
Alexander remembered him continually. All through his journey up to India and back, that man haunted him: that he did not ask for anything. He could have given him the whole world just for the asking, but he asked only that Alexander move a little away because he was preventing the sun from reaching his body.
And as he was leaving, Diogenes had said, “Just remember two things, as a gift from Diogenes: one, that nobody has ever conquered the world. Something always remains unconquered – because the world is multi-dimensional; you cannot conquer it in all its dimensions in such a small life. Hence everybody who has gone to conquer the world has died frustrated.
“Secondly, you will never come back home, because this is how ambition goes on leading you farther and farther: it goes on telling you, ‘Just a few miles more. A few miles more and you will be attaining the very ambition of your heart.’ And people go on chasing hallucinations, and life goes on slipping through their hands. Just remember these two things as gifts from a poor man, a nobody.”
Alexander thanked him – although in the cool morning he was perspiring. That man was such… Each thing he said would make you perspire even in the cold breeze on a cold morning, because he would exactly hit the wounds that you are hiding.
Alexander never could attain to being the conqueror of the whole world. He could not reach to the very end of India; he could not reach to Japan, to China, to Australia, and of course America was not known. He turned back from the Punjab. He was only thirty-three, but the ambition and the continuous struggle to fulfill it had made him so tired and spent, like a used cartridge. He was only thirty-three, at the prime of his youth, but in his inner world he had become old and was ready to die. Somehow, perhaps in death, there would be rest.
And Diogenes’ shadow was always following him: “You will not be able to conquer the world.” He turned back, and before reaching Athens, his capital – just another twenty-four hours…
Sometimes small incidents become so symbolic and so meaningful. Just twenty-four hours more and he would have at least been back in his capital, in his home – not in the real home that Diogenes was pointing at, but at least in the house which we all try to make a home.
The home is inside. Outside there are only houses. But he could not even reach the outside house. He died twenty-four hours before reaching Athens.
A strange coincidence: the day Alexander died, Diogenes also died. In Greek mythology, like many other mythologies… The same is the case in Indian mythology: before entering the other world you have to pass through a river, the Vaitarani. In Greek mythology also you have to cross a river; that river is the boundary line of this world and that world.
Up to now, whatever I have said is historical fact. But after the death of Diogenes and Alexander, this story became prevalent all over Greece. It is very significant. It cannot be historical, but it is very close to truth. It is not factual.
That’s how I make the difference between facts and truth: a thing may be factual, but still untrue; a thing may be non-factual, but still true. A story may be just a myth – not history, but of immense significance because it indicates toward truth.
It is said that Diogenes died a few minutes after the death of Alexander. They met while crossing the river – Alexander was ahead, Diogenes was coming behind. Hearing the sound Alexander looked back. It was an even more embarrassing encounter than the first one, because at that time at least Alexander was not naked; this time he was also naked.
But people try to rationalize, try to hide their embarrassment. So just to hide his embarrassment he said, “Hello, Diogenes. Perhaps this may be the first time in the whole history of existence that a great emperor and a naked beggar are crossing the river together.”
Diogenes said, “It is, but you are not clear about who is the emperor and who is the beggar. The emperor is behind the beggar. You wasted your life; still you are stubborn! Where is your empire? I have not lost anything because I had nothing, only that lamp. That too I had found by the side of the road – I don’t know to whom it belongs – and I have left it by the side of the road. I had gone into the world naked, I am coming from the world naked.”

That’s what Kabir says in one of his songs – Jyon ki tyon dhari dinhin chadariya. Kabira jatan se odhi chadariya – “I have used the clothes of life with such care and such awareness that I have returned its gift to existence exactly as it was given to me.”
The whole society, your parents, your teachers, your leaders, your priests, all want you to become somebody special, Alexanders. But if you want to be meditative they will all be against you, because meditation means you are turning away from all ambitions.

I was a student in the university. The head of my department was so worried about my examinations, he said, “I have taught in almost a dozen countries all over the world, hundreds of students, but I have never been concerned about their examinations. It is very puzzling to my mind – why am I so much concerned about your examination? You have to promise me that you will reach the examination hall in time.”
I told him, “This is not part of your work. Your part is to teach me. It is my business to be worried about the examination or not. If I can manage, I will reach the hall.”
He was suspicious. The old man used to stand every day with his car outside the hostel, in front of my room, to pick me up and to see me enter the examination hall. And then he would leave.
I said, “This is too much, you are taking unnecessary trouble. Your house is four miles away. You have to wake up, you are not an early riser.”
He was a drunkard. But life is a mystery. Here, the people who are nonvegetarians, drunkards, gamblers, you may find them so loving and so human that it is surprising. And on the other hand, the people who are strictly vegetarian… Adolf Hitler was strictly vegetarian. He never smoked, he never drank any alcoholic beverage, he went to bed early, he got up early in the morning – he was a saint! If you just look at his life-pattern and style, he was a monk. And he killed six million people! It would have been better if he had been a drunkard, nonvegetarian, a chain smoker, but a nice human being.
This old man, my professor, did not drink for those few days. He had to wake up early in the morning to pick me up and force me into the examination hall. The whole university knew; they all thought, “This is strange!” I said, “It is not strange. He loves me. He loves me just like his son, and he wants me to be somebody in life. That is the trouble: that love is creating the trouble. He is afraid that I am too careless about being somebody in the world.”
He used to instruct the chief examiner, “Keep an eye that he does not leave when I have left – because I cannot wait outside for three hours unnecessarily. Keep an eye on him and don’t let him go. And watch to see that he is writing and is not doing something else.”
Sometimes I would finish the answers in two hours but the chief examiner would not allow me to go out. He would say, “Your professor will torture me. Simply sit here; do whatsoever you want to do. Or just go through the answers you have written; maybe you can add something more.”
I said, “This is strange. I am finished with the answers; I should be allowed to go. Everybody else is allowed.”
He said, “Everybody else is allowed, but nobody else is being brought here like a prisoner every day!”
And after the examination the professor would ask me – every day, with the question paper in his hand – “What have you written about it?” Just to console him I would say things which I had not written at all – and he knew it. I knew that he knew it because he was the dean of the faculty, so he was looking at my papers. Before asking me, he had already looked at what I had written. And now I was answering him according to the textbooks, although what I had written was according to myself.
But he could not say to me, “I have looked” – because that is illegal. So he would say, “You know; I know…”
I said, “What to do? You should not do anything illegal, and if you are caught doing anything illegal I will be the first to report it to the vice-chancellor.”
He said, “But these are not the answers that you have written. Do you want to remain a nobody for your whole life? It hurts me. You have the talent, you have the genius; you can become anything you want.”
I said, “I don’t want to use my talent and my genius to become anybody. I simply want to relax into myself and be myself, anonymous, because my decision is in favor of meditation, not in favor of mind. Whatever you are saying is mind – and I have to use the mind, but the more you use the mind the farther away it takes you from yourself.”

This is the reason why man is not meditative: the whole society forces him to be in a state of mind, not in a state of meditation.
Just imagine a world where people are meditative. It will be a simple world, but it will be tremendously beautiful. It will be silent. It will not have crimes, it will not have courts, it will not have any kind of politics. It will be a loving brotherhood, a vast commune of people who are absolutely satisfied with themselves, utterly contented with themselves. Even Alexander the Great cannot give them a gift.
If you are running to get something outside yourself, you have to be subservient to the mind. If you drop all ambitions and you are concerned more about your inner flowering; if you are more concerned about your inner juice so that it can flow and reach to others, more concerned about love, compassion, peace – then man will be meditative.
And you have asked how we can make meditation a great movement. Don’t be worried about making it a great movement because this is how the mind is very tricky. You will forget all about your meditation and you will be concerned about the movement – how to make it big, how to make it worldwide, how to make many more people meditate. If they are not willing, then force them to meditate. It has been done; the whole of history is the proof.
Mohammed founded a religion called Islam – Islam means peace – and he wanted the whole world to be a peaceful place. But people are not willing to be peaceful – then cut off their heads, at least a dead man is peaceful. A living man is a nuisance, you cannot rely on a living man – he may be peaceful this moment, and the next moment he may do something troublesome. On Mohammed’s sword were written the words: “Peace is my message.”
Now the message has to be written on the sword, and the message is peace, and people have to be forced to become peaceful at the point of a sword, that is, to become Mohammedans. A Mohammedan is a man of peace. Don’t be concerned about a movement, because your mind is so tricky, so slippery…
I have heard…

A man and a woman were in love for years. And as expected, the woman was asking every day, sitting on Chowpatty Beach… Who else goes to sit there? She was constantly harassing the man: “When are you going to marry me? We are getting old.”
And the man said, “Just look at the full moon.” It was just rising above the ocean.
And the woman said, “Shut up! Don’t change the subject. Whenever I bring up the real subject you always try to change the subject. The moon will remain there; we will discuss it later on. First, answer my question. When are we going to get married?”

The mind is constantly trying to change the subject.
Whenever you will be thinking of meditation, the mind will change the subject in such a way that you will not even be aware that the subject has been changed. The mind will start making a great movement of meditation, transforming the whole world and forgetting meditation itself – because where is the time? You are in a great revolution, changing the whole world.
In fact the mind is so cunning that it condemns those people who meditate. It says, “They are selfish, just concerned about themselves. And the whole world is dying! People need peace, and people are in tension; people are living in hell and you are sitting silently in meditation. This is sheer selfishness.”
Mind is very cunning. You have to be very aware of it. Tell the mind, “Don’t change the subject. First I have to meditate, because I cannot share that which I don’t have. I cannot share meditation with people, I cannot share love with people, I cannot share my joy with people, because I don’t have it. I am a beggar; I can only pretend to be an emperor.”
But that pretension cannot last for a long time. Soon people start seeing that “This man is just a hypocrite. He himself is tense, he himself is worried, he himself lives in pain and suffering and misery, and he is talking about creating the world as a paradise!”
So for the second part of your question, I would like to say to you: forget about it. It is your mind which is trying to change the subject. First the marriage, marriage with yourself: first the meditation, and then out of it the fragrance will come, out of it the light will come. Out of it, words will come which are not dead but alive, words which have authority in them. And they may help others, but that is not going to be your goal; it will be a by-product.
The changing of other people through meditation is a by-product, it is not a goal. Become a light unto yourself, and that will create the urge to become a light to many people who are thirsty. Become the example, and that example will bring the movement on its own accord.

Osho,
On our way to realization, there is no “we” there is only “I.” Is there anything to soften this pain?
The problem about such questions is they are intellectual, they are not experiential.
You have just thought about it, that “On our way I will be alone, I cannot be with people, so the question of there being any possibility of ‘we’ is nonexistent; only ‘I’ will be there alone. It makes one feel afraid, it makes one wonder whether to go on such a path or not.”
But this is all intellectual. It is not that you have gone on the path and you have found this question. On the path you will not find this question, because I and we are together. The I cannot exist without the we; it is just a part of the collectivity.
The moment you are on the path, first the others leave and the last that leaves you is yourself, the I. And when the I leaves, only then are you alone; otherwise the I is there. There are two – you, and the I. When the I has also gone, you are alone. And the beauty of aloneness… It has nothing to do with I, it has nothing to do with we.
They were all together. They exist together. Many I’s together become we. It is simply a collective name of I’s. Have you ever come across a we? Even the people who use it – for example a president of a country or a prime minister of a country is supposed to use we instead of I so that his we becomes representative of the whole land he is the prime minister or the president of. But even the prime minister who uses we is simply an I, there is no we. That we is only a convenience: a linguistic convenience.
And when you move on the path it is not that the we leaves you and only I is left behind; the I also goes with the we.
I am reminded of a beautiful Sufi story:

When al-Hillaj Mansoor went to his master Junnaid, his family, his friends, even his neighbors had all come out of the town to say good-bye. He was going in search of truth. When he reached Junnaid, he entered; Junnaid was alone sitting in the mosque. He asked, “May I come in, sir?”
Junnaid looked at him, and looked here and looked there, and said, “First leave the crowd outside! And you have some nerve to ask, ‘May I come in, sir?’ Then why is this crowd all around you?”
Al-Hillaj could not believe… He looked all around, there was nobody.
Junnaid said, “Don’t look all around, close your eyes, and then look all around. Your friends, your family, your neighbors – they are still there.”
He closed his eyes and he was surprised. He was still remembering the people he had left behind: their tears, their last greetings, the elder ones giving him their last blessings. They were all there, the whole crowd was there.
Junnaid said, “Get out, with this whole crowd! When you are alone then ask, ‘May I come in, sir?’”
It took seven months. Al-Hillaj used to live outside the mosque; the master used to live inside. Hundreds of disciples would come and go, and thinking that he must be a shoemaker or a shoeshiner, they would put their shoes in front of him. And sitting there doing nothing, he thought, “This is not bad,” so he started polishing their shoes.
After seven months, one night when there was nobody around, Junnaid came out and said, “Al-Hillaj, come in.”
But al-Hillaj said, “Forgive me, sir. Now I cannot ask, ‘May I come in, sir?’ because that ‘I’ is also gone. I am absolutely alone.”
Junnaid said, “That’s why I had to come, you stupid! Come in. I knew that now it will be difficult for you to ask the question, because who will ask the question? The crowd is gone, and with the crowd that fellow who used to be ‘I’ – that too is gone.” And the poor fellow is shining shoes. And al-Hillaj belonged to a very rich, royal family.
Junnaid said, “That’s why I have come in the middle of the night, to bring you in. When you are not, then you are called in; when you are not, then the whole existence is ready to receive you.”

Your question is intellectual. Avoid intellectual questions. If they arise, try first to experience them and you will find the answer yourself.

Osho,
Playfulness, happiness and creativity come together inside myself when I am in this state – I call it craziness. Can you please talk about this?
First, what you call craziness is authentic sanity. When you are not in that state which you call craziness, you are crazy. Creativity, you call craziness. Playfulness, you call craziness. Joyfulness, you call craziness. Then what is sanity? So first, drop that word craziness.
Only the creators are sane. What they create does not matter. In India, there have been a few great mystics whose creativity cannot even be recognized as creativity.
Kabir remained spinning, weaving for his whole life. He was a weaver. He had thousands of disciples, and they would tell him, “You have become old, and you are unnecessarily tiring yourself. We can take care of you; stop this weaving, and then making clothes, and going to the market and selling them.”
But Kabir always said, “You do not understand. You think I am just a weaver. This is not just like other weavers – it is not my business, it is my love affair. I make these clothes for nobody other than God himself. And naturally, when I am making things for him, they have to be perfect.”
And he treated his customers as gods. He used to say to his customers, “Take this piece of cloth, but be very careful, Ram” – for every customer he had only one name, Ram; Ram means God – “I have taken so much trouble in making it. Be careful, be respectful. It is not my business; it is my prayer, it is my worship.”
Another great mystic, Gora, was a potter, and he continued to make beautiful pots for his whole life. And he had disciples – rich disciples, even kings – and they would say, “It is embarrassing for us that our master is just making pots and selling pots on his donkey in the market. Please stop doing this.”
But Gora would say, “It is difficult. It is part of my creativity. Nobody else can make these pots, only Gora can – because all others are making them for money, and I am pouring out my whole love, my whole heart. It is a meditation to me.”
A third great mystic was Raidas, who continued to make shoes. In India, particularly, to make shoes is thought to be one of the worst professions. It is only for the sudras, the untouchables. He was an untouchable, but high caste brahmins started coming to him. He was uneducated, but what he was saying was pure scripture. And everybody was trying to convince him, “Stop making shoes. It doesn’t fit. It doesn’t look right that a mystic of your caliber should make shoes” – but Raidas refused.
He said, “That is the only art I know. I am a poor shoemaker. This is the only creative talent through which I can serve existence.”
Don’t call creativity, playfulness, joyousness, cheerfulness, “craziness.” These are the sanest dimensions of your being. Let your whole life become sane – full of songs, full of flowers, full of love. The world may call you crazy, but please, you should not call it crazy. Let the world call it crazy – it doesn’t matter – but I cannot allow you to call it crazy.
It is going to happen to every meditator. What is happening to you, I would love it to happen to everybody. Create something. And whatever you are doing, do it playfully, not seriously. And wherever you are, be in a celebration. Forget words like business. Let your life be simply a festival.
To me, only those few people who attain to this state are capable of calling themselves religious – not the Hindus, not the Mohammedans, not the Christians, but the creative people – enriching existence, beautifying existence.
Don’t leave this world without making it a little more beautiful than you found it when you came into it.

Osho,
When the doorbell rings and I open the door to receive the guest, before I disappear will I get a glimpse of her?
Milarepa, you are impossible!
When he was going to play his guitar in England, although there is no God, I prayed, “God save the queen” – because he is such a ladykiller.
Look at his question: he is saying, “When the doorbell rings and I open the door, before I disappear will I be able to get a little glimpse of her!”
Just old habits, but no harm… In fact the doorbell never rings.
I will tell you a story.

Junnaid, the master of al-Hillaj Mansoor, in his young days when he was still a seeker, used to sit in front of the mosque praying to God, “How long is it going to take? Open the doors!”
And a mystic woman, Rabiya al-Adabiya, happened to pass by. She hit Junnaid’s head hard with her staff. She was an old woman; Junnaid said, “Rabiya, to disturb somebody in prayer is not right; and you are a well-known religious saint and you disturbed my prayer!”
She said, “I had to disturb it. And next time if I hear you praying in this way again – ‘God open the doors’ – then only God can save you. I am going to hit your head so hard!”
He said, “But what is the problem? I am not creating any trouble for anybody.”
She said, “That is not the point – because the doors are open, they are never closed. Just get up and go in!”

Milarepa, the doorbell never rings. And the doorbell is such an ultra-modern thing that there is no mention of it in any scriptures, cannot be.
The doors are always open. And the ultimate comes, but you cannot have a glimpse of the ultimate – whether you want to call him “him” or “her” does not matter. As the ultimate comes, you disappear. The happening is simultaneous, there is no gap. It is not that the ultimate comes and you say, “Thank you, sir. Sit down; what will you take – Coca Cola, Fanta, Seven-Up? What will you take?” There is no time, not even to say thank-you. The moment the ultimate descends you are already gone. He comes only in the space where you used to be, in your nothingness.
Nobody has seen the ultimate, for the simple reason that to see the ultimate you have to disappear, you cannot be a witness. You can become it but you cannot see it. We call those people who have become it the mystics; they are not the ones who have seen godliness, they have become godliness. It is not an object for them to see. It is their very subjectivity, it is their very being.

============================================================

Osho,
Last night I was reading The Book of Mirdad. It was so beautiful and so strong that I couldn't stop reading for hours. Then suddenly I felt that my breath had changed, and I found myself on the edge of crying, and I didn't know whether it was sadness, desperation, bliss, or all three at the same time. I tried to find out by reading the words again, but I realized that my mind didn't really understand when I looked at them. How is it possible that words which the mind doesn't understand can touch one so deeply?
There are millions of books in the world, but The Book of Mirdad stands out far above any other book in existence. It is unfortunate that very few people are acquainted with The Book of Mirdad, for the simple reason that it is not a religious scripture. It is a parable, a fiction, but containing oceanic truth.
It is a small book, but the man who gave birth to this book… And mind my words, I am not saying the man who wrote this book. Nobody wrote this book. I am saying the man who gave birth to this book – he was an unknown, a nobody. And because he was not a novelist, he never wrote again; just that single book contains his whole experience. The name of the man was Mikhail Naimy.
It is an extraordinary book in the sense that you can read it and miss it completely, because the meaning of the book is not in the words of the book. The meaning of the book is running side by side in silence between the words, between the lines, in the gaps.
If you are in a state of meditativeness – if you are not only reading a fiction but you are encountering the whole religious experience of a great human being, absorbing it; not intellectually understanding but existentially drinking it – the words are there but they become secondary. Something else becomes primary: the silence that those words create, the music that those words create. The words affect your mind, and the music goes directly to your heart.
And it is a book to be read by the heart, not by the mind. It is a book not to be understood, but experienced. It is something phenomenal. Millions of people have tried to write books so that they can express the inexpressible, but they have utterly failed. I know only one book, The Book of Mirdad, which has not failed; and if you cannot get to the very essence of it, it will be your failure, not his.
He has created a perfect device of words, parables, situations. If you allow it, the book becomes alive and something starts happening to your being. And naturally, because you have never come to such a state, you are puzzled about what it is – sadness? Blissfulness? There are tears, but those tears can be either of sadness or they can be of immense joy. You have come to a point where you have never been before, so naturally you cannot categorize it. You cannot put a label on it according to your old experiences. But the name does not mean anything. What matters is that you have taken a step beyond yourself. You have never been in this space; you have entered into the unknown, and it is so unknown that you don’t have the vocabulary even to give it a name.
Just see the point: it may look like sadness, because for the first time in your life you will become aware that up to now you have not been alive. Life has happened today.
And it brings a great sadness: you were alive – but knowing this new experience, your whole life becomes so mundane, so meaningless, that it is better to say that it was more death than life. And a sadness arises: “Why could I not reach this space before?” It is so close – just a step beyond the boundaries of your old mind and the whole sky with all its stars becomes available. You were confined in such a small prison – and nobody was imprisoning you. You were the prisoner and you were the imprisoned. You were the jailer and you were the jailed. Naturally a sadness, looking to the past…
But looking to the present, a great blissfulness, a peace that passeth understanding, a silence that is not just the opposite of sound: a silence which is absence of sound, not the opposite of sound… Music without any instruments, a song without any words. For the first time you start feeling, “Up to now I have been living in the head; and only this moment the doors of my heart are open.”
There is an old Chinese story, and because of the story a proverb has come into existence – that when the musician becomes perfect, he burns his instruments; they become not only useless, they become a nuisance because they only create noise. Only between that noise are there a few moments of music – why not have it all?
And when the archer becomes a perfect master, he drops his bow and his arrows and forgets all about it.
A strange proverb – because ordinarily we think that when we become perfect our instruments will also attain a perfection with us; their working will also become perfect.
The proverb comes from a story:

A man had become a great archer, and he was confident that he had attained perfection. He never missed any target. He was able to kill flying birds without fail. He appeared before the emperor and told him, “It is time that you should declare me the greatest, the master archer of the empire. Otherwise I am ready for any challenge. If somebody doubts it, I am ready for a competition.”
The king knew the man, and knew that what he was saying was not bragging; it was a simple fact. But the old servant of the king said, “Wait a minute before you say anything, because I have something to say before you decide.” He was so old that he had served the grandfather of the king, the father of the king, the king himself, and there was a possibility that he would serve the fourth generation also.
The king had tremendous respect for the man. He said, “If you have something to say, say it.”
The old servant said, “This man knows nothing of archery yet. He can kill animals, he can kill birds, flying birds; he never misses any target. That’s all okay, but that is not perfection and mastery. I know a man who is a perfect archer. He lives in the mountains, and because he became a perfect archer thirty years ago, he has completely forgotten about archery. After perfection, what is the point of remembering?”
The archer was puzzled: “What kind of archery is this, that the man has even forgotten archery? He has not practiced for thirty years – if I don’t practice a single day, the next day I can see mistakes happening. Within two days, critics will see that mistakes are happening, and within three days anybody will be able to see that there are mistakes. Thirty years!”
And the old man said, “Unless you go to the mountains and meet the great archer… If he approves there is no question of any competition – I will ask the emperor to declare you the champion master of the whole kingdom.”
The archer had to go and search in the mountains. On a very high peak, in a small cave, he found the old man. The archer was carrying his bow, his arrows. The old man looked at the bow, looked at the arrows, and he said, “These things I have seen once, I remember. What do you call these things?”
The man said, “You are a great archer? You don’t even know the name of the bow and the arrows!”
The old man said, “This is a bow and arrows, and what is the function of it? What do you do with it?”
The archer said, “Come out and I will show you.” And he killed a faraway flying bird with one arrow – just one arrow and the bird was on the earth.
The old man said, “You call this archery? I remember, when I was young I used to call this archery too. Now, come with me.”
The old man must have been nearabout one hundred and twenty years old, not less than that – very frail. He took the young archer to a cliff which was hanging over a valley thousands of feet deep. The archer stopped. He said, “I cannot go on that cliff! Just a small mistake and you are finished forever.”
But the old man went to the very edge – his feet were half hanging off the edge of the cliff. He was standing with just half his feet on the edge and he said, “Come on – you are a great archer; you should know balance, because the secret of archery is balance. And if you are trembling so much inside, your arrow cannot be perfect, because your arrow will be going through your hands. And you are trembling. Come on! You are young, and as you see I am old, one hundred and twenty years old.”
The man tried, one or two feet, and fell down on the rock. He said, “I have never been afraid of death. But I cannot do that.”
That old man came back and he said, “If you cannot do this, forget all about archery. The day you can do this you will throw away the bow, you will throw away the arrows. Now look…” There were seven birds flying far away. The old man simply looked at those seven birds one by one, and they all fell down on the earth.
He said, “When you have no trembling inside, just your eyes are enough; no arrows are needed. So go back, you are an amateur. I will come when the time has come, I will keep watch on you. I have my people in the city, in the capital; it was one of my people who sent you here. He was one of my disciples and I have a few more disciples who will keep watch. And if I am not alive, then I will tell them to inform the king when you are a perfect archer.”
The young man was simply in great despair. He proved to be an amateur; he was thinking himself to be a champion master.
After five years… The old man had said, “Learn inner balancing.” I call it meditation; these are different names, in different countries. “Inner balancing” means you are so balanced at your innermost center that there is no trembling at all. You are in such a silent, unmoving space, as if you are not.
After five years a man visited the archer. As they were entering the archer’s house, he saw a big bow hanging on the wall. The guest asked, “What is that?”
And the archer said, “I used to remember, but fortunately I met an old man… Now I have completely forgotten what it is.”
But the guest said, “I have heard that you are an archer.”
The man said, “Forget all about it. When a man is young he has all kinds of stupid ideas. I had my stupidities also, but due to the compassion of the old man in the mountains I survived, I moved on.”
That very day the king called him and declared him to be the champion master archer of the kingdom.
“But,” he said, “I know nothing of archery. What are you doing?”
The king said, “I am not doing anything. These are instructions from your master. Of course you could not be the champion master. The old man has left his body, with the message, ‘While I am alive he cannot be a champion, and the poor fellow wanted to be a champion so desperately. But if I am alive in the kingdom it is impossible – I will never come to the capital to contest; the whole idea is childish – but there are my disciples who will not allow it to happen. Only my death… And it is worth it, to make him happy.’ The old man is dead. The message has come that you should be declared the champion.”
The king said, “Just out of curiosity I would like to see how far your eyes can function as arrows.” The man looked into the sky. Nine birds – a whole flock – came down to the earth. And the king said, “That old man was never wrong.”

This is archery. A musician when he is perfect forgets his instruments; now silence is his music.
The Book of Mirdad is one of the greatest devices that have been created down the ages. Don’t read it like any other book. Don’t read it like Shrimad Bhagavadgita or the Holy Bible. Read it as beautiful poetry, as music spread on the pages. Read it as a message from a master of meditation. The words are code words. Don’t look for their meaning in the dictionary. Their meaning is when they strike something in your heart.
That’s why you felt, reading Mirdad, that your breathing changed. It has to be understood very carefully: your breathing changes with each of your emotions. When you are angry, watch: you will have a different kind of breathing, unrhythmic, chaotic. When you are in love, just holding the hand of your beloved, your breathing will be different – peaceful, silent, musical, harmonious. And these are small things; I am just giving you examples to understand.
When you are sitting with the master, the breathing becomes so harmonious that sometimes you may think it has stopped. There will be moments when you suddenly become aware, “Has my breathing stopped?” – because it will be so silent that even you cannot feel its movement.

There was one very significant man in south India, Brahma Yogi – but he got distracted. He was able to bring his breathing to such a harmonious state that doctors declared him to be dead – because if there is no breathing… And not just for a second or two, he was capable of ten minutes. Medical science has its own limits. For ten minutes, no sign of breathing… In Oxford, in Cambridge, in Kolkata University, in Rangoon University – he went all over the world.
He completely forgot the mission of his life: that he had been meditating to attain to his innermost self. That’s how people get distracted. He became an entertainer, a showman. He earned much, he became world famous. And the doctors everywhere were shocked. He was examined in every medical college of importance in the world, with all their refined instruments. They had to declare that the man was dead, and after ten minutes he would start breathing again.
It was not that he was not breathing for ten minutes; he was breathing, but the breathing had gone so slow that it was beyond the instruments’ capacity to capture its movement.

This happened to you reading Mirdad, that you felt your breathing was changing. It was beautiful. And because your breathing changed, that’s why you came to a point where you were indecisive. Whether you were sad or silent, blissful, ecstatic, you could not decide, because the thing was so new and you had no category to put it in. But I will tell you: you were sad, sad because you have wasted your whole life – and this space was so close; you were just to reach and it was going to be available to you. You were sad, just like a beggar will be sad who comes to know that he is the emperor and there has been some mistake; the beggar is sitting on the throne and the emperor is begging in the streets. All those years of begging – a shadow, a sadness.
You also felt silence, because The Book of Mirdad has been created by a man who knows the inner workings of human consciousness. He was not a writer; hence nobody ever bothered to give him a Nobel Prize. He was alive in this century, he was our contemporary. His book has not been translated into many languages for the simple reason that the book is unique – it is not a book, it is a device. And it is not meant to be read, it is meant to create a certain atmosphere around you. If you are ready, available, receptive, the atmosphere will be created and there will be great silence. And silence is always blissful.
So you got very confused. There was sadness because of the past; there was silence because of the present – and silence is always bringing flowers of blissfulness.
You thought there must be something in the words, so you read those words again. But you could not find it; in those words there was nothing, they were ordinary words. From where was this experience happening? It was happening because you are on the path.
You are part of a mystery school. You are a seeker. It would not have happened to you if you were not on the path. It happened to you because you were getting ready for this happening, and The Book of Mirdad simply triggered what was already going to happen. It would have happened even without The Book of Mirdad, perhaps a little later. The man on the path may find in his life… Sometimes it happens listening to music. The musician may be an ordinary man; he may not know anything about silence and blissfulness, but his music can trigger something in you. It may be triggered by seeing a sunset; now the sunset is not aware of you at all. It may be triggered by the perfume of a rose.
But remember one thing: just because The Book of Mirdad helped you in reaching a new space in yourself, don’t tell others to read it – because they will find it just ordinary fiction, beautiful. They may even destroy your connection that has been created unknowingly; you weren’t ready for this experience. So one thing: don’t tell others, “Read The Book of Mirdad, it brings such beautiful experiences.” It may not bring them anything.
Secondly, because it has brought you a beautiful experience this time, don’t read it again and again in order to get it. This time you were not expecting anything; next time you will be full of expectations. You will be waiting and watching for when it happens – it will not happen. Once in a while it is possible, but the basic condition to be fulfilled is, no expectations.
And I say to you, because it happened with The Book of Mirdad, it can happen through many other avenues. You are ready, you just need a little push. Be available to all those situations where that push is possible, but without any expectation. Just to enjoy a beautiful dance, beautiful music, a beautiful painting… Just sitting by the side of the sea and the music of the waves, the continuous music, or looking at the moon – anything may help, but don’t expect.
The Book of Mirdad can be of immense help if you don’t expect, and it is a book worth reading thousands of times. You cannot understand its oceanic meaning in one reading, because in each page, each turn, each chapter, each line, there is a possibility – because the man who wrote it… I understand that man. He was one of the greatest men of this century. He lived unknown to the world, but just this one book makes him the greatest writer not only of this century but of all the centuries.
I myself might have never come across his book, because it was published in the beginning of this century and then it was never published again, it never became a bestseller. It was not available in the libraries because at the most only three thousand copies were in existence all over the world. I became aware of the book in a strange way.

I was a student in the university, but on Sundays I used to go to a market in the city where stolen things were sold. I was not interested in anything else, just stolen books. I got The Book of Mirdad as a stolen book. Somebody’s whole library… Three hundred books in all, and all the books were beautiful. And for those three hundred books a man was asking only a hundred rupees, so I immediately gave him a hundred rupees.
The man said, “But remember one thing: these are stolen books, and if the police come here I am going to tell them your name, because on each book is the name of the man to whom these books belong and he is a well-known man.” He was a retired professor of literature.
I said, “Don’t be worried.”
And the police finally came and they said, “This is not good. You were told by the man that these are stolen books, still you purchased them.”
I said, “I don’t repent, and I don’t want to talk to you. I would like to meet the owner.”
They said, “What for?”
I said, “I can settle things with him very easily. He is a retired professor, old. Just take me to him” – so they took me to the old professor.
I closed the doors and said to the professor, “You are already so old, what are you going to do with those books? You will be dead soon, and you have found the right man for your books.”
He said, “You are strange! You have purchased my stolen books and you have come to convince me that you have done the right thing?”
I said, “Yes, I say I have done the right thing. You have used them. You cannot read anymore; your eyes are no longer in a situation to read. If you just want to keep three hundred books on your shelf, I can bring five hundred books, six hundred books. But don’t ask for those three hundred books, particularly for The Book of Mirdad – that I cannot return to you, stolen or not stolen.”
The old man looked at me and said, “Did you like The Book of Mirdad?”
I said, “I not only liked it – I have read thousands of books; none is comparable to it.”
He gave me fifty rupees back. He said, “You have wasted fifty rupees – you are a student; you don’t have much money, I know about you. Keep the books. And I agree with you that the books have reached the right man, and the person who has stolen them needs to be rewarded. I am going to die any day, you are right, and then I don’t know where those books will go.
“And I have loved those books, cherished those books. My whole life I have collected the best books. And the moment you said The Book of Mirdad you closed the deal. Just take these fifty rupees, and whenever you need more – because I don’t have anybody; no wife, no children, and enough pension and I don’t have any expenses – you are always welcome to come to me. If you don’t have money to purchase books I am here.
“Your love for Mirdad has made you a man of my family. I have loved Mirdad my whole life, and I have tried hundreds of my friends, but nobody could get him. And you are ready to fight for a stolen book; you are ready to go to the court for a stolen book. There is no need. I was in search of you.”
“It is strange,” he said, “that The Book of Mirdad has found you itself.”

That’s how I found the first copy of The Book of Mirdad. His second edition had not been published; it had not been translated into any other language.
It needs to be in every house, it is so precious. And it has touched your heart. Just don’t start having expectations, and it will help you immensely on the way.

Osho,
Unenlightened enlightenment seems to become more and more popular these days, particularly among therapists. Having recovered from that disease, I say that claiming enlightenment without having attained is the greatest betrayal; and influencing others through authority based on this falseness is the greatest crime possible. Please comment.
Gunakar, you are a hundred percent right. Before I answer your question, I would like to introduce you to the people here. They may not know you, and without knowing you it will be difficult for them to understand the proper context of the question.
Gunakar is one of my most beloved sannyasins. He is immensely talented, a keen intelligence, and an authentic search. He had come to me many years ago, and he has remained with me in many ups and many downs.
The biggest problem with him is that he is a German, and a German finds it easier to be a master than to be a disciple, naturally. So while he was here with me in India he was intelligent enough to understand that he is not a master, and he worked as a disciple. But whenever he would go back to Germany the trouble would arise: in Germany he would become enlightened.
There are no outer criteria for enlightenment, so he would get a few Germans to support him also as an enlightened master. And once he got into the trip then it was not only that he would sit silently – that is very difficult for a German – he had to do something. Now that he was enlightened, he started enlightening the whole world: writing letters to prime ministers, presidents, all the ambassadors of all the countries, to the UN, convincing them that except for enlightenment there is no way out.
And when he would be going full-fledged, I would send him a message, “Come back to India because you have done enough. A little rest will be good” – and coming back to India, his enlightenment would disappear. Sitting in front of me, he had to become a disciple again. He started feeling very strange because it happened once, twice, thrice…
Then he said, “This is a strange thing. We think Osho helps people to become enlightened. I become enlightened when I am in Germany, and whenever I go back to Osho he finishes my enlightenment – I am back to zero!”
So he had not come for almost six years. Who wants to lose enlightenment? You come to me to be enlightened, and poor Gunakar had to come here to lose enlightenment.
But a false thing is a false thing, an imagination is an imagination. You can brag, you can deceive, you can become a con man, but deep down you will know what you are doing.
And finally he realized, in Germany, that once a man becomes enlightened he cannot become unenlightened, that is impossible. That has never happened in the whole of history – except to Gunakar. There is no other precedent. And he is intelligent enough and courageous enough; he dropped it himself.
The last time, I was watching what was happening. I was inquiring about how things were going, how far his enlightenment had reached. The last time I inquired of a German sannyasin in America; he said, “A strange phenomenon has happened. I met Gunakar. I had never thought of it…” Because he had a beautiful castle on the Rhine river in a very scenic place, really worthy of an enlightened man, and disciples would come to the castle…
The German sannyasin told me, “I met him in a restaurant in a sannyasin commune. When he was enlightened he was not moving like ordinary people, in ordinary places. And he was not only in the restaurant, he was washing plates, serving; he was working there!” And the German sannyasin asked him, “Gunakar, what happened to the enlightenment?”
And he said, “I am not enlightened, I am just a dishwasher.”
When this was told to me, I really felt tremendously happy for him because to be a dishwasher in reality is better than to be a Gautam Buddha in a dream.
And this time he has not come as an enlightened man. This time has a beauty: he has come just as himself – open, available, ready. All those past days when he used to come he was tight. It was bound to be, because he was afraid – he would come to me and I was going to tell him, “Gunakar, just get down. You are not supposed to be enlightened yet. Wait!” He was tight, he was tense, afraid. And he could not live there either, because the inner thirst was there, still unfulfilled. That bogus enlightenment was not going to help. So he had to come, but with a tenseness.
This time he has come relaxed, with nothing to lose. He is an ordinary man. And to be ordinary is to be something immensely beautiful. It means relaxed, it means non-tense, it means ready to grow. This is the background.
He is saying, “I am out of this disease of getting false enlightenment, pretending to be really enlightened, teaching people.” Now he can understand what harm such people must be doing.
And this is what is happening in Europe: there are few sannyasins – they were therapists in the Commune in America. Because I am not there… The whole sannyas movement has the greatest numbers in Europe, particularly in Germany. That’s why the German government is the most afraid of me. I have not applied for any visa. Still, their parliament has decided that, in case I apply, I am not to be allowed in Germany. Their fear is that I have the biggest number of sannyasins in Germany; and these are not just the masses but the intelligentsia. Gunakar is a law expert, somebody is a scientist, somebody is a painter, an artist, somebody is a mathematician – Germany has tremendous qualities – and strangely enough, they have all become attracted to sannyas. And the fear of the German government is that if I come to Germany the people who are not yet sannyasins – the young generation, young intellectuals – are bound to become sannyasins. And every government is afraid of any movement that creates individuals, that creates values of freedom, love, silence, peace, rejoicing.
So it is a good chance for a few people – there are two, three persons I have been told about who have become enlightened – knowing that I cannot come into Germany. The Indian government is being pressured by the American government that no sannyasins should be allowed to reach to me. So it is a good opportunity for these people: they have become enlightened, they are gathering followers.
And Gunakar is right, that it is one of the greatest crimes to claim enlightenment when you are not – because this is the greatest deception that you can give to humanity. It is the ugliest phenomenon. You can be a con man – cheat people out of their money, their belongings, their houses, their wives, their husbands, anything; that is immaterial, that does not matter much. But a con man as far as enlightenment is concerned is cheating you about your consciousness, about your very being. He is doing some kind of violence which is invisible, but which is the worst that can be done by any criminal.
All those three therapists will come back, because soon they will realize that they are doing something which is not only harming others but is harming their own growth. If you are not enlightened and you claim that you are, then you stop progressing toward enlightenment. You are already enlightened; what is the need?
All kinds of cheats, thieves can be forgiven, but the people who are playing with your consciousness, with your being, cannot be forgiven.
Somebody takes away your money: perhaps he is not doing harm to you, perhaps he is unburdening you. Perhaps from today he will be continuously feeling guilty. And what is he going to do with the money?
I have heard…

A poor tailor had the habit of purchasing a lottery ticket every month. He had been doing that for thirty years; it had almost become a routine. In the beginning he used to hope that someday he would win the lottery. By and by he had completely forgotten that there was any connection between winning the lottery and purchasing the ticket.
But old habits die hard. So he went on purchasing the ticket, and one day suddenly a black Rolls Royce limousine came and stopped in front of the poor tailor’s shop. People came out, carrying big bags full of notes. He said, “What is the matter? What is happening?”
They said, “You have won! Your number has come up.”
He could not believe it. But he was immensely happy, that at last… He has won ten lakh, a million rupees; now there is no need to be a poor tailor.
He closed the shop and threw the key in a well, because what is the need now? – he is not going to open the shop again. Ten lakhs for a poor tailor – it is enough for ten lives!
But it was not enough even for two years, because what will you do? He started drinking, he started gambling, he started going to the prostitutes. He was a healthy man; within two years all the money was gone, all health was gone, and he was asking people, somebody, to help him to find the key to his shop.
They said, “You are an idiot. Why did you throw away the key in the first place?”
He said, “I was thinking that ten lakhs would be enough. I am alone, there is nobody else. I was so poor that I could never get married. But my God, these ten lakhs have given me such hell – from one prostitute to another prostitute, every morning finding myself lying in the gutter completely drunk, the hangover, the headache… I never had any headache in my life; these two years I have suffered hell. If I meet these people who came in that black Rolls Royce I will kill them.”
“But,” the people said, “that was not their fault! You have been purchasing the tickets.”
Some young man jumped into the well, tried to find the key, and the key to the shop was found. People collected some money for the tailor’s medicine and for his doctor; the poor man really had suffered badly. But again he started purchasing those tickets! Old habits die really hard. And he was continually condemning the lottery: “I don’t want to win.”
“But why do you go on purchasing the tickets?”
He said, “If I don’t purchase, it seems something is missing – I cannot sleep well, I cannot work well. It has become such a routine. You can imagine, thirty years… But you can be certain that it cannot happen again. In thirty years it only happened once. In another thirty years I will be dead and it cannot happen again.”
But by chance it happened again. The next year, the same black Rolls Royce stood before his house. He said, “My God, why are you against me? Have I to suffer that hell again?”
The whole neighborhood gathered. They said, “If you don’t want to suffer, you can reject the money, you can donate it.”
He said, “Never! It is my earning.”
He locked the door to his shop and he said, “Now, I really drop the key. There will be no need for it because I cannot survive these two years anymore. I don’t have enough health; and again those scenes, those nightmares…” And again he went on the same routine.
After two years he was a completely shattered man. Back to the shop! He asked the neighbors, “Somehow find my key, and I promise you that I will never accept any money from these idiots who have been killing me.”
They said, “Never accept? That means you will purchase, you will go on purchasing the tickets?”
He said, “As far as the ticket is concerned, that I cannot stop.”

People get into a certain routine.
Gunakar, it is good that you got out of it without me. It was good that you stayed in Germany and didn’t come to me for these six, seven years. It has been a great realization to you – that imagination is not going to help, and that any claim about inner realization which is false is the greatest crime in the world.
Those people who are doing it will also realize it; help them to realize. Go to them and tell them that you have passed this disease: “Now stop purchasing this ticket. You know perfectly well that you are not enlightened.”
And tell them, “If you are enlightened, go to Osho. If you have guts, go to him. And if your enlightenment still remains in front of him, then you can be certain that it is there. But if it disappears and comes back only in Germany, it is not of any worth.”
Enlightenment made in Germany is simply useless!

Osho,
An old hermit living in the mountains said, when asked why he was up there and how long he had been there, “A long time ago there were two bulls fighting by the seashore. They fought and fought, and finally disappeared into the ocean. And from that day to this, I cannot remember a single thing.” I really love the way the old hermit evoked such a vivid image of the duality of the mind, and then its disappearance into enlightenment. Would you please comment on this?
There is nothing to comment on; the story is so simple, so beautiful, so clear.
Your mind is a duality – because of its constant fight, you cannot know your oneness. The moment that fight disappears you have come home. Then who bothers to remember how many days, how many years, how many lives – all that concern was of the mind.
Your inner being has no calendars. Its existence is eternal; it is eternity itself.
When you find such beautiful stories, and when you can understand them yourself, don’t make a question out of them. You should bring questions which you cannot find answers for. You should bring questions which are torturing you and there is no way out.
Whatever I can say on this story will simply be elaboration, but it will not give you any more insight. The story is complete in itself.

Osho,
What is the holy fire?
Milarepa, I am!

============================================================

Osho,
For the last week I have known that I have cancer. From that time, except for a few moments of panic and fear, I have felt a deep calmness and relaxation coming into my being. Have I already given up my life, or is this the quietness of acceptance?
We have given up our lives at the very moment when we were born, because the birth is nothing but a beginning of death. Each moment you will be dying more and more.
It is not that on a certain day, at seventy years old, death comes; it is not an event, it is a process that begins with the birth. It takes seventy years. It is mighty lazy, but it is a process, not an event. And I am emphasizing this fact so that I can make it clear to you that life and death are not two things. They become two if death is an event which ends life. Then they become two; then they become antagonistic, enemies.
When I say that death is a process beginning with birth, I am saying that life is also a process beginning with the same birth – and these are not two processes. It is one process: it begins with birth, it ends with death. But life and death are like two wings of a bird, or two hands, or two legs.
Even your brain has two hemispheres, separate, the right hemisphere and the left hemisphere. You cannot exist without this dialectics. Life is a dialectics – and if you understand this, a tremendous acceptance of death naturally comes to you.
It is not against you, it is part of you; without it you cannot be alive. It is just like the background of a blackboard on which you write with white chalk: the blackboard is not against the white chalk, it simply gives it emphasis, prominence. Without the blackboard your white writing will disappear. It is like day and night – you see it everywhere, but you go on behaving like blind people. Without the night there is no day.
The deeper you enter into the dialectics… It is a miraculous experience. Without inaction there is no action; if you cannot relax, you cannot act. The more you can relax, the more perfection will be in your action. They appear to be opposites; they are not. The better you dissolve into sleep in the night, the sharper, the younger you will wake up in the morning. And everywhere in life you will find the same dialectical process.

The mystics of Zen have a koan: they ask the disciples to meditate on the sound of one hand clapping. It is absurd – there cannot be any sound of one hand clapping. Clapping with what? For clapping, two hands are needed, apparently opposed to each other but deep down creating a single clap; united in their efforts, coherent, neither opposed to each other nor contradictory to each other, but complementary. The meditation is given for the simple reason so that you can become aware that in life you cannot find a single instance supporting the sound of one hand clapping. The whole existence is two hands clapping: man and woman, day and night, life and death, love and hate. The deeper the disciple meditates… Slowly, slowly he becomes aware that in existence it is impossible to find anything.
And the master asks everyone, “Have you found it? Have you heard the sound of one hand clapping?”
Many ideas come to their minds: the sound of running water – and they think perhaps this is it. And they run to the master to tell him, “I have got it: the sound of running water.”
And they will get a hit from the master’s staff: “You idiot! This is not the sound of one hand clapping. There is duality; just go and see. All those rocks in the water, they are creating a sound; it is not the sound of one, it is always the sound of two.” In fact there cannot be a sound of one.
Frustrated thousands of times, each answer that the disciple finds is rejected. He comes to the realization that sound is always of the two.
Silence is of the one; only silence can be the answer. It is not a clapping. But going through all this process to reach to the silence… And then he comes to the master and the master asks, “Have you heard it?”
And the disciple bows down to his feet, tears of joy flowing from his eyes. He cannot even say, “Yes, I have found it.” That will not be accurate. He has not found silence; on the contrary, he has disappeared in silence. It is not a finding, it is a disappearing. He is no more. Only silence is.
Now, who is there to say, “I have found the answer”? Hence the tears of joy and a grateful head touching the feet of the master…
And the master says, “I do understand, don’t be worried. Don’t be worried that you cannot say it. Nobody can say it.” That’s why sometimes, when you had come before, rushing with an answer, even before you told me the answer I hit you with my staff and told you, ‘You idiot! Go back!’ And you were puzzled, that you have not even said the answer and it has been rejected.
“Now you can understand: it is not a question of this answer or that answer. All answers are wrong. Only silence – which is an existential presence, not an intellectual answer – is right.”

You are fortunate to know that within seven days you are going to die, that you have cancer. Everybody has cancer, just a few people are lazy, you are speedy! – American! Most people are Indians; even in dying, they will take time. They are always late, always missing the train.
I say you are blessed to know – because everybody is going to die, but because it is unknown when, where, people go on living under the illusion that they are going to live forever. They always see others dying. That logically supports their standpoint that “It is always the other who dies. I never die.” You must have seen many people dying, giving you a strong support, a rational background that it is always the other who dies. And when you die you will not know, you will be unconscious – you will miss the opportunity of knowing death. Those who have known death are unanimous in their opinion that it is the greatest orgasmic experience of life.
But people die unconsciously. It is good that there are diseases which are predictable. Cancer means that you have known seven days before – or seven months, whatever the time may be – that death is coming closer each moment. These seven days are not allowed to everybody. Cancer seems to be something you must have earned in your past life – because J. Krishnamurti died of cancer, Ramana Maharshi died of cancer, Ramakrishna died of cancer. Strange… Three enlightened people who are not mythological, who have lived just now, died of cancer. It seems to be something spiritual!
It certainly has a spiritual dimension. I am not saying that all those who die of cancer are enlightened beings, but they can become enlightened beings more easily than anybody else because others go on living under the illusion that they are going to live; there is no hurry. Meditation can be postponed – tomorrow, the day after tomorrow. What is the hurry? And there are more urgent things which have to be done today. Meditation is never urgent because death is never urgent.
For the man who comes to know that cancer is going to strike him within seven days, everything in life becomes meaningless. All urgencies disappear. He was thinking of making a beautiful palace; the very idea disappears. He was thinking to fight the next election; the whole idea disappears. He was worried about the Third World War; he is no longer worried. It doesn’t matter to him. What happens after him does not matter – he has only seven days to live.
If he is a little alert in those seven days he can live seventy years or seven hundred years or the whole eternity – because now meditation becomes a priority, love becomes a priority: dance, rejoicing, experiencing beauty, which were never priorities before.
This week, the full-moon night will be a priority because he will never see the full-moon again. This is his last full-moon. He has lived for years. Moons have come and gone, and he has never bothered about it; but now he has to take it seriously. This is the last moon, this is the last chance to love, this is the last chance to be, this is the last chance to experience all that is beautiful in life.
And he has no energy anymore for anger, for fighting. He can postpone; he can say, “After a week I will see you in court, but this week let me be on a holiday.”
Yes, in the beginning you will feel sadness, despair, that life is slipping out of your hands. But it is always slipping out of your hands whether you know it or not. It is slipping out of everybody else’s hands whether he knows it or not. You are fortunate that you know it.

I am reminded of a great mystic, Eknath. A man used to go to Eknath for years. One day he went early in the morning when nobody was there and he asked Eknath, “Please forgive me. I have come early so that there is nobody else, because I am going to ask a question which I have always wanted to ask but I felt so embarrassed that I suppressed it.”
Eknath said, “There was no reason to be embarrassed. You could have asked any question, anytime. Sit down here.”
So they sat down in the temple, and the man said, “It is difficult for me; how to present it? My question is that for years I have been coming to you and I have never seen you sad, frustrated. I have never seen you in anxiety, in any kind of worry. You are always happy, always fulfilled, contented.
“I cannot believe this. My doubting mind says, ‘This man is pretending.’ I have been fighting with my mind, telling it that for years you cannot pretend: ‘If he’s pretending, you try.’ And I have tried – for five minutes, seven minutes at the most, and I forget all about it. Worries come, anger comes, sadness comes, and if nobody comes then the wife comes! – and all pretensions are gone.
“How do you manage day after day, month after month, year after year? I have always seen the same joy, the same grace. Please forgive me, but the doubt persists that somehow you are pretending. Perhaps you don’t have a wife; that seems to be the only difference between me and you.”
Eknath said, “Just show me your hand.” He took his hand in his own hands, washed it, looked very seriously…
The man said, “Is something wrong? What happened?” He forgot all about his doubt and his pretension and Eknath.
Eknath said, “Before I start answering your question, just by the way, I see that your lifeline is finished – just seven days more. So I wanted to tell it to you first because I may forget. Once I start explaining and answering your question, I may forget.”
The man said, “I am no longer interested in the question, and I am no longer interested in the answer. Just help me to stand up.” He was a young man.
Eknath said, “You cannot stand up?”
He said, “I feel all energy gone. Just seven days, and I had so many plans – everything shattered. Help me! My house is not far away, just take me to my house.”
Eknath said, “You can go. You can walk. You have come walking perfectly well just a few seconds ago.”
But the man tried somehow to stand up; he looked as if all his energy had been sucked out. And when he was going down the steps you could see that suddenly he had become old, he was taking the support of the railing. As he was walking on the road you could see – he could fall at any moment, he was walking like a drunkard. Somehow he reached home.
Everybody was getting up, it was early morning; and he went to sleep. They all asked, “What is the matter? Are you sick, not feeling well?”
He said, “Now even sickness does not matter. Feeling well or not well is irrelevant. My lifeline is finished – only seven days. Today is Sunday; the next Sunday, as the sun is setting I will be gone. I am already gone!”
The whole house was sad. Relatives started gathering, friends – because Eknath had never spoken a lie, he was a man of truth. If he has said it, death is certain.
On the seventh day, just before the sun was setting – and the wife was crying, and the children were crying, and the brothers were crying, and the old father and the old mother had become unconscious. Eknath arrived at the house, and they all said, “You have come right in time. Just bless him; he is going for an unknown journey.”
And in seven days that man had changed so much; even Eknath had to make an effort to recognize him. He was simply a skeleton. Eknath shook him; he somehow tried to open his eyes. Eknath said, “I have come to say to you that you are not going to die. Your lifeline is still long enough. I said that you are going to die in seven days as an answer to your question. That was my answer.”
The man jumped up. He said, “That was your answer? My God! You had already killed me. I was just looking outside the window for the sun to set and I would have died.”
And there was rejoicing… But the man asked, “What kind of answer is this? This kind of answer can kill people. You seem to be murderous! We believe in you, and you take advantage of our faith.”
Eknath said, “Except that answer, nothing would have helped. I have come to ask you: in seven days have you been fighting with anybody, have you been angry with anybody? Have you been going to the court? – which is your practice; every day you are found in the court.”
And he was a man of that type; that was his business. He was ready to be an eyewitness even for murders; just pay him enough. In one murder he was an eyewitness in the court, and the court knew that this man could not be an eyewitness to everything – he was a professional witness.
The judge asked, “How far away were you standing when this murder happened?”
He said, “Seventeen feet, six inches.”
The judge said, “Great! So it means you measured the distance between yourself and the man who was murdered?”
He said, “Yes, because I knew some idiot or somebody else was going to ask the question, so it is better to be prepared. I measured inch by inch; it was exactly seventeen feet, six inches.” That was his business.
Eknath asked, “What happened to your business? In seven days how many times have you eyewitnessed, how much have you earned?”
He said, “What are you talking about? I have not moved from my bed. I have not eaten; there is no appetite, no thirst. I am simply dead. I don’t feel any energy, any life in me.”
Eknath said, “Now get up, it is time. Take a good bath, eat well. Tomorrow you have a case in the court – continue the business. And I have answered your question – because since I have become aware that everybody has to die…
“And death can come tomorrow – you had seven days. I don’t have even seven days; tomorrow I may not see the sunrise again. I don’t have time for stupid things, for stupid ambitions, for greed, for anger, for hate; I simply don’t have time, because tomorrow I may not be here.
“In this small span of life, if I can rejoice in the beauties of existence, the beauties of human beings; if I can share my love, if I can share my songs, perhaps death will not be hard on me.”

I have heard from the ancients that those who know how to live automatically come to know how to die. Their death is a thing of beauty because they only die outwardly; inwardly the life journey continues. Your coming to know that you have cancer certainly will be shocking, will bring sadness and despair. But you are my sannyasin; you have to make this opportunity into a great transformation of being.
These few days that you will be here should be the days of meditation, love, compassion, friendliness, playfulness, laughter; and if you can do that, you will be rewarded by a conscious death. That is the reward of a conscious life.
An unconscious life comes to die unconsciously. A conscious life is rewarded by existence with a conscious death.
And to die consciously is to know the ultimate orgasmic experience of life and to know simultaneously that nothing dies, only forms change.
You are moving into a new house – and of course a better house, on a higher level of consciousness. You use the opportunity to grow. And life is absolutely just, fair. Whatever you earn you never lose it, you are rewarded for it.
Accept that death is just part of your life, and accept the fact that it is good that you have come to know beforehand. Otherwise death comes and you cannot hear the footsteps, the sounds of death approaching you. That’s why I said you are fortunate: death has knocked seven days before.
Use these days in deep acceptance. Make these seven days as joyful as possible; make these seven days days of laughter. Die with a joke on your face – the smile, the thankfulness, the gratitude for all that life has given to you.
And this I say to you: death is fiction. There is no death because nothing dies, only things change. And if you are aware, you can make them change for the better. That’s how evolution happens.
That’s how an unconscious man becomes a Gautam Buddha.

Osho,
Yesterday, when I was coming from my office for your discourse, I was feeling very much depressed, tired and tense; but after the discourse I felt myself so relaxed, energetic and fresh. The next morning I am again depressed and tense. Is it because of my mind or the surrounding atmosphere?
Laheru, it is because of your mind. The surrounding atmosphere is always supportive. If your mind is silent, the same atmosphere will support silence; if your mind is tense, the same atmosphere will support your tensions. The surrounding atmosphere does not count; what counts is your mind.
If it was otherwise, then it would be impossible for anybody to become enlightened, because everybody is surrounded by the same kind of atmosphere.

I am reminded of a small story, an ancient story of a wise king who used to go on a round of the capital in the middle of the night in disguise, to see whether things were going as they should or not. He was always puzzled, because one naked young man used to stand under a tree, even in the middle of the night. He went at different times in the night but the man was always standing there, alert. The king was puzzled: What is he doing? One day he went to him and asked, “What is your trouble? Why do you go on standing here naked in the cold night?”
The man said, “I have a certain treasure that needs constant watchfulness. I cannot be unconscious even for a single moment, it is too risky.”
The king asked, “Where is your treasure?”
The man laughed. He said, “You will not understand. My treasure is within me. And the more I am aware – whether it is day or night – the deeper I am reaching into myself.”
It was for the first time the king saw the man so closely – a beautiful man with magnetic eyes, with an invisible aura. The king was touched. He said, “I have always been thinking of finding a master but I never found one. I cannot leave you. I invite you to come with me to the palace. You will have all that you need. But why stand…? That does not suit the master of the king. From this moment you are the master of the king.”
The man said, “Of course!” And he jumped on the king’s horse and asked the king to walk by his side: “Let us go to the palace.”
The king said, “This man seems to be something!” – naked, he was sitting on the horse, and for the first time in his life the king had to walk – “and what will the guards of the palace say when they see us?”
But the man said, “Don’t be worried about the guards or your wife or your children; nobody can interfere. I will declare myself: I am your master.”
The king started having doubts: “This man, whom I thought has renounced the world, is standing naked for many days… And he has said yes so willingly. Not only has he said yes, he immediately jumped on my horse!”
In the palace he was given the best room, all the best facilities – better than the king. He made it a point, that “I am the master of the king, and it will be insulting to the king that the master has something less than the king.” The king gave everything that was needed and he lived in immense luxury.
The king thought, “I have been deceived. This man is not a real saint, he is a con man. He was standing there naked just to befool me, and he befooled me. But how to get rid of this man?”
Six months passed. But the king was a cultured man; he could not say, “You have cheated me.” But one day, while walking on the lawn of the palace with the master, the king said, “It is strange, but a doubt sometimes arises in me. You were standing naked under the tree, you have renounced everything of the world, and now you are living in royal luxury. The question that arises in me is this: What is the difference now between me and you?”
The young man said, “The difference? You will have to come with me. At the right moment, at the right place, I will give you the answer.”
The king and the master both went on horses. When they reached the border of the kingdom the king said, “This is the border. Now we are entering into another’s kingdom, and that is not right for me. What is your answer?”
He said, “My answer is this: this is your horse, these are your clothes. Take them home. I am going – this is the difference. You have a kingdom, I don’t have a kingdom. Wherever I live, there is my kingdom.”
The king was shocked, but he thought that he had misjudged the man. He fell at his feet and he said, “Forgive me, I misjudged you.”
The man said, “Simply get up on your horse and return to the palace, because I am such a simple man. I can again put on the dress, and the horse is waiting and I can come back – and the doubt will again come into your mind. I don’t want to create any doubt. You simply take both horses and these clothes. Naked I was, naked I am – and there are so many trees, I can stand anywhere.”
The king tried hard to convince him but the man said, “I can come, there is no trouble; but I know your mind, and it is not… You are being a liar. It is not that the doubt has arisen just now; it had arisen at the very moment I jumped on your horse that night six months ago.
“To me it makes no difference: I was as silent and peaceful, as centered, as balanced in myself under the tree as in your palace. The atmosphere, the environment around me makes no difference at all. Wherever I am, there is my kingdom.”

Laheru, it is not the atmosphere. This is how we go on throwing our responsibility on others; and that is not right – not right for a seeker. A seeker should be clear about it, that “every responsibility is mine.”
You will be surprised to know; the moment you take all the responsibilities on your own shoulders you are the most free man in the whole world, because now wherever you are it makes no difference: your freedom is intact, your peace is intact, your integrity is intact.
One of my sannyasins from Germany has sent me a present. His name is Nivedano. I will give it to Laheru because the present is something really significant. Its name is “Mind and Meditation.” Just give me the present.
[Osho is handed a picture in a wooden frame, and he holds up the picture for everyone to see.]
This is a small present, but with significant meaning.
This is meditation – this vast silence, this peaceful blue, this beautiful beach… Sitting silently, doing nothing, the spring comes and the grass grows by itself. But turn it…
[He turns it upside down. The sky becomes a thunderstorm of swirling clouds.]
This is the mind. Everything is disturbed. It is sheer disturbance. That’s how it goes on happening in you.
Meditation and mind are made of the same stuff. When the mind is silent, it is meditation.
[Osho is holding the picture still.]
It is getting silent. The beach is settling, the waves are settling. But turn it…
[He turns it.]
…and you have Laherubhai! Laherubhai this is for you.

Osho,
I read the following story in the book, Diary of a Zen Nun. It goes like this: a master and his disciple were attending a funeral. The disciple pointed to the corpse, and asked, “Is that dead or alive?” The master answered, “I cannot say.” The disciple threatened to strike the master, who said, “You can hit me all you like, but I cannot say whether that is dead or alive.” So the disciple struck him. That evening the master told the others what had happened, and announced that the disciple would have to leave because he had struck the master. So the disciple went off to another master and told his tale, hoping to hear that the first master was a cruel monster and off his nut. Instead of which, the second master exclaimed, “What a compassionate master you had there!” – whereupon the disciple began to see what it was all about. Osho, would you please comment on this story?
The story is from Gayan. I know the story, but she has missed a few significant things in it and without them, the story becomes very ordinary.
I do not know Japanese; the story is Japanese. But I know Zen. And I know Germans; Gayan is a German. Germans have very special qualities: one of them is always missing the most important thing. She must have read it in a German translation; most probably the translator missed it. Whatever is left, she must have done.
It is said that if you tell a joke to an Englishman he laughs twice; once just to give company to everybody – everybody is laughing, and if he does not laugh they will think he seems to be nuts – and the second time he laughs in the middle of the night when he gets it.
Tell a joke to a German: he laughs only once, because everybody else is laughing, but he never comes to understand the joke.
Haridas was one of my oldest German sannyasins, and I must have told more jokes than anyone in the whole history of man. And he was sitting in front of me, and every day, for years, after the meeting he would ask people, “Why were you laughing? What is the matter with you guys? Everybody starts laughing, I don’t get the point at all.”
If you tell the same joke to a Jew, he will not laugh. On the contrary, he will say, “Listen. This is an old joke, rotten. Secondly, you are telling it all wrong; first learn how to tell a joke.”
This story:

The master had an enemy master living close to his monastery. They were contradicting each other, criticizing each other as harshly and as hard as possible. He had gone to the funeral with one of his disciples. The dead body was there, the funeral was being prepared. The disciple asks, “Is it dead or alive?”
The master says, “I cannot say.” Remember the emphasis on the word cannot: not that I do not know, not that I do not want, not that I will not; his emphasis is “I cannot say – your question is raising something which is unanswerable. It cannot be brought into words.”
The master had the habit that whenever a disciple would not answer his question, he would hit him. Following the same routine, the disciple said, “Then I will hit you.”
He said, “You can hit me as much as you want, but I cannot say.”
He hit the old master. And seeing that this man – who cannot answer a simple thing, which anybody else could have answered – is simply useless, he decided, “I should go to the opponent.”
He was not thrown out of the monastery; that’s where the story goes wrong. He himself went to the opposing master who resided just opposite the monastery. His monastery was there, he had his own following. And the disciple was thinking that the other master would be very happy to receive him, particularly when he described that his master was absolutely ignorant and cruel – because not to answer the question of the disciple is cruelty.
He told the second master, “My master is simply ignorant. He knows nothing. Everybody there was preparing the funeral; of course the body was a corpse, it was dead; and this… My master, this dodo, said, ‘I cannot say.’
“And he hits every disciple if we do not answer his questions. So following the same routine, I hit him. He said, ‘You can hit me as much as you want, that is your right, but still I cannot say.’ This man is ignorant, cruel, insensitive, stubborn; he does not deserve to be called a master.”
He was thinking that he would be praised highly, because the opponent master – who was always criticizing his master – would rejoice and would welcome him with folded hands: “Come into my monastery. Why were you wasting your time with that idiot?” But instead of this he said, “You are ignorant. You do not understand compassion. Your master was very compassionate. Just go back to your own monastery.”
Standing outside the monastery, between both monasteries, he was in a dilemma. He had thought that these people were against each other. For the first time he saw they are not against each other; perhaps this is their device to help people, the disciples. And the way the man said, “He is so compassionate and you are an idiot. You could not understand him. Just go back!” Then it dawned on him, the whole phenomenon: that when any ordinary layman could have said that the body was dead, his master refused to say whether it was dead or alive, because this is the basic foundation of Zen and of all great realized people in the world: that existence cannot be divided into either-or. You cannot say it is dead, you cannot say it is alive. You cannot divide existence.
Just because this man was no longer breathing did not mean he was dead. He is still part of existence, which is eternally alive. You cannot say he is dead, because in this existence nothing is dead. Nothing can be dead. Everything is alive; only life is.
And of course you cannot say that he is alive; otherwise, what was the point of the funeral?
So for all practical purposes the funeral was okay, but for philosophical purposes – for deeper and more fundamental purposes – he’s as alive as ever. It is just that before he used to breathe, now he has decided not to breathe. The difference is not much. And whether he is breathing or not breathing, in either case, he remains part of existence. You cannot fall out of it, because it is everywhere. You cannot go out of existence, so you cannot go out of life.
The other master was saying, “You don’t understand the compassion of your master. He was compassionate not to answer you, because any answer would have been wrong. And you would have been satisfied very easily; he could have said, ‘This is dead’ – but that would not have been fundamentally right.
“His compassion is great, so great that he even allowed you to hit him – because he hits the disciples who cannot answer his questions. Just see his justice: because he was not answering your question – he did not care whether you are a disciple or a master – he allowed you; you could hit him as much as you want. But he said, ‘I cannot answer; I cannot say.’
“Just go back to your old master. If he cannot improve you, I cannot do anything. In fact when I fail with people I send them to your monastery – this is our agreement. We quarrel, we contradict each other – this is our joy. All these contradictions and arguments and philosophical controversies, we enjoy; and those who understand it, they also enjoy.
“It is just like an old story: two sweet-makers started fighting, throwing sweets at each other, and the whole road was filled with the crowd and people were enjoying the sweets. And they were encouraging both: ‘You did well! Hit him well!’ – both sides. But people were enjoying sweets.
“We have been throwing sweets,” the old man said. “Those who understand, enjoy; those who don’t understand, they think we are enemies. We were disciples of one master. It is that master who was responsible for creating this strange device of opening monasteries against each other. He said, ‘Some fools will join you, some fools will join the other; but don’t leave anyone out – divide. Those who are against one will go to the other; those who are against the other will come to you.’ This is our great master’s device that we are following.
“But I will not take you in, you belong to him. And he has been so compassionate that it will be ugly of me to accept you.”

Mystics have their own way. The ordinary masses cannot understand. Mystics even speak against each other for the benefit of the poor and the mediocre who cannot understand it in any other way. They can only understand something controversial. And for centuries mystics have done that.
It is only in this century that humanity is so intellectually poor that you don’t have mystics who are in a deep, loving conspiracy against you – to bring you to life, to love, to laughter.

============================================================

Osho,
What are the roots and what are the wings of a meditator?
Meditation is a way of settling in oneself, at the innermost core of your being. Once you have found the center of your existence you will have found both the roots and the wings. The roots are in existence, making you a more integrated human being, an individual. And the wings are in the fragrance that is released by being in contact with existence. The fragrance consists of freedom, love, compassion, authenticity, sincerity, a sense of humor, and a tremendous feeling of blissfulness. The roots make you an individual, and the wings give you the freedom to love, to be creative, to share unconditionally the joy that you have found.
The roots and wings come together. They are two sides of one experience, and that experience is finding the center of your being.
We are continuously moving on the circumference, always somewhere else far away from our own being, always directed toward others. When all this is dropped, when all objects are dropped, when you close your eyes to all that is not you – even your mind, your heartbeats are left far behind – only a silence remains.
In this silence you will settle slowly into the center of your being, and then the roots will grow on their own accord, and the wings too. You need not worry about them. You cannot do anything about them. They come on their own. You simply fulfill one condition: that is, to be at home – and the whole existence becomes a bliss to you, a benediction.

Osho,
What is the difference between the ancient Upanishads and the one which is happening here and now?
There is no difference. There cannot be, because it is not a question of time.
It may have happened thousands of years before, it may happen thousands of years in the future. The time is irrelevant; the question is of the happening.
Can you ask the same question, “What is the difference between the ancient lovers and the modern lovers?” Love knows no time. Whether the love was in ancient times or today or in the future, time is simply not relevant. Love is the same.
An upanishad is a love affair – a love affair between a master and a disciple, a love affair where the master is ready to share. He is just like a raincloud, ready to shower. And the disciple is ready to receive – open, with no windows closed, holding nothing back – totally available. Whenever a disciple is totally available and the master is overflowing with his ecstasy, the upanishad happens.
There is no difference in the ancient Upanishads, in this upanishad, or in the future upanishads. An upanishad is a phenomenon which is beyond time, beyond space. Don’t call the Upanishads ancient, because that word ancient makes them related to time. Don’t call this upanishad modern, because time has no place as far as the phenomenon of upanishad is concerned. There is no ancient love, there is no modern love.
And neither is it confined to space: it can happen anywhere, any time; the only necessity is that somebody is overflowing with blissfulness and somebody else has the guts to be available to this overflowing bliss, is not afraid.
People are always afraid of unknown things, and this is the most unknown. People are always afraid of the strange, and this is the strangest experience possible. People are always afraid of the mysterious, and this is the last word in the world of mysteries.

Osho,
Are the Upanishads and Zen the same?
They are not. The upanishad is a happening between the master and the disciple, Zen is the happening in the disciple himself. The master may help him, may create devices, show the path – but Zen is basically an individual experience. It is not like love. It happens in your aloneness. It is not a relationship.
Upanishad is the greatest relationship. It cannot happen if the master is alone. He may be full, overflowing; but it cannot happen because the receiving end is absent. It cannot happen if the disciple is alone, however open, however available – but available to what? Open to what?
Upanishad is a more human phenomenon than Zen. It is closer to human reality because it is closer to love. It can be understood more easily, because it is very difficult to find a person who has not tasted something of love in some moments. There is some experience which can be used to explain to him what happens when a master and a disciple dissolve into each other. So the first thing: the upanishad is a totally different phenomenon than Zen.
And the second thing: the experience is the same. The paths are different, but finally – whether you have followed Zen and reached alone to the peak, or you have allowed a master to hold your hand in deep trust and reached the peak – it does not matter how you reach the peak. Your vehicles can be different, your means can be different; the peak is the same. The experience of finding oneself and simultaneously finding the whole secret of existence is the same.
So on the one hand I say they are totally different. On the other hand I say they are exactly the same. And there is no contradiction in these two statements. The paths are different but the ultimate finding is the same.
Zen is an arduous path, a hard and long way. But it is up to you – there are people who love to go the hard way. The simple way does not appeal to them; the hard way is exciting.
Upanishad is not a hard way. It is a very simple and relaxed experience. It is the shortest way possible to the ultimate reality.
But there are different kinds of people in the world; they all need different paths to reach to their fulfillment. These are the two extremes. In this sense, Zen and upanishad are as far away from each other as two points can be; and yet, the final conclusion is always the same. One is a hard way, a long way, but a few people need it.

One mystic in Sri Lanka was dying. He declared that the next morning he would be dying. He had thousands of followers; they all gathered. He was old, almost ninety years, and he had been teaching these people for sixty years. And the Buddhist teaching is a very hard way. But the mystic, at the point of death said, “I have been teaching you the way I have followed, the way that has helped me to attain to the ultimate. But I now know that there is a shortcut in reaching to the ultimate too – so short that if somebody wants to go with me, stand up! I am leaving.”
People looked at each other, about whom they thought, “These are very religious people, perhaps they may stand up. As far as I am concerned, there are so many problems.”
Nobody stood up. Only one man raised his hand.
The old man said, “Even that is a great consolation to me. But why are you not standing up?”
He said, “Because I don’t want to go right now, but I want to know where the shortcut is in case at some time I want to go. Why bother with the hard and long way? That’s why I just raised my hand. I cannot stand up. As far as the hard way is concerned, we know – because for sixty years you have been teaching it. And at the last moment… You are a strange fellow; at least tell us where the short way is!”
The mystic said, “The short way has a condition: it is only for those who are ready to go right now. I give another chance – stand up!”
Even that man’s hand went down, and there was utter silence. And everybody was looking at each other…
The old man died.

People want the way to be hard and to be long because this is a good excuse for avoiding – because the way is so long and so hard, life is so short and so many problems, so many responsibilities; so much has to be done. The children are growing up, they have to be married. The business is not good – or the business is so good that this is not the moment to meditate.
Upanishad is the shortest possible way. Neither has the disciple to do anything nor has the master to do anything. Doing is not part of it.
I have quoted the great Zen poet Basho many times to you: “Sitting silently, doing nothing, the spring comes and the grass grows by itself.” As far as upanishadic methodology is concerned, even doing nothing is not needed. And what are you going to do even if the grass grows by itself? Whether you sit silently or not, it will grow. Whether you sit silently or not, the spring will come. You are unnecessarily taking the credit for the grass growing by itself – because you have been sitting silently, doing nothing! Even when you were not, the grass used to grow; when you will not be here the grass will continue to grow. It has nothing to do with you. The upanishad does not even ask you to sit silently doing nothing. Even doing nothing is a doing.
The whole approach of the upanishad is so totally different. The disciple is available, the master is overflowing, and something transpires. Nobody is doing it. Nobody can take the credit for it. Hence I say the way of the upanishad is the most mysterious way in the whole human consciousness and its evolution.
Zen is mysterious, but yet it can be understood. Upanishad is simply mysterious; there is no way of understanding it. You can have it, you can dissolve into it, but there is no question of explanation – only experience.
All over the world there have been mystery schools. In Greece, Pythagoras founded mystery schools. In the religion of the Jews, Baal Shem founded a mystery school called Hasidism. In China there is the mystery school of Tao, and when Buddhism reached China a new mystery school, a chain of new mystery schools opened, ch’an. The same mystery school, ch’an, reached Japan with the name zen. But the word zen or ch’an, or the Buddhist word jhan are all different forms of the Sanskrit word dhyana.
In India dhyana has been known for centuries – that mystery school was there before Gautam Buddha ever meditated.
There was the mystery school of Tantra. There were the mystery schools of different types of Yoga.
I have gone through all these schools not as a scholar – that is not my approach – but as an experiencer. I can say to you: nothing rises higher than the mystery school of upanishads – because it is the shortest. Nobody is expected to do anything, and yet the miracle happens.

Osho,
What is the difference between religious scriptures like the Gita, the Koran, the Bible, etc., and the Upanishads?
First, the Upanishads are not religious scriptures. They are poetic expressions of those who have known.
They are not Hindu, they are not Buddhist, they are not Jaina; they don’t belong to any religion. They are the experiences of individuals sitting at the feet of their master – and when the experience overwhelmed them they danced, they sang, they uttered strange statements. And these were not made by their minds; it was almost as if they were just hollow bamboos. Existence has made them flutes; it was existence itself singing a song. That’s why no upanishad carries the name of its writer.
The Koran belongs to Mohammed, the New Testament belongs to Jesus Christ, the Gita belongs to Krishna, the Dhammapada belongs to Gautam Buddha; Ishavasya Upanishad belongs to no one.
Tremendously courageous people – they have not even signed their names. In fact it would have been ugly to sign because they were not the writers, they were not the composers, they were not the poets. The poetry was coming from above, from beyond. They were simply vehicles.
Because of this, you will be surprised also to know that the whole Koran consists of Hajrat Mohammed’s statements, the Gita consists totally of Krishna’s statements, but each upanishad consists of many peoples’ expressions – anybody who had reached to that beyond and allowed the beyond to descend through him.
The Upanishads have not bothered to collect the words of one person. Each upanishad contains the words of many enlightened people, and without any signatures. Words have never been so golden. Words have never taken such high flights, and yet the people who allowed them to happen have remained anonymous. This is so beautiful, immensely beautiful, because they knew, “We have nothing to do. We have just been passages. Something has come through us.”
One upanishadic rishi, one upanishadic seer – the name, of course, is unknown – is reported to have said, “If there is any mistake in my statement, that is mine. And if there is any truth, I cannot claim that it is mine. The truth belongs to the universe; the mistake belongs to me, I was not such a good vehicle.” These were rare people, unique human beings, the very salt of the earth.
I would like my sannyasins to become this very salt of the earth again.
It is because these are not religious scriptures, that’s why there is no religion following the Upanishads. These are the very few books which contain the greatest quantity of truth and have remained unorganized. There is no organization around them; there cannot be – because of the very methodology there cannot be a church, there cannot be a pope or a shankaracharya.
I love someone, but I cannot make an organization of it. And when I leave this body I will leave in heritage my wealth, my house, my land, everything – but I cannot leave my love in heritage.
These Upanishads are pure love, so there have been no successors, no priests, no followers. These books are the most pure in the whole world, absolutely without any pollution. They have remained just the way they were expressed.
Nobody has fought because of the Upanishads.
Mohammedans have fought because of the Koran. Hindus have fought because of the Gita. Christians have fought because of the New Testament. Everybody has been fighting for their religious scripture.
Who cares about the poor Upanishads? But it has been fortunate that nobody has bothered about them; they have remained as pure as when they were given birth to, as innocent as ever.
The statements in the Upanishads – there are one hundred and twelve upanishads; the statements in the Upanishads cannot be made into dogmas for the simple reason that the statements are not rational, logical. They are contradictory.
One upanishad says, “I do not know who created the world.” You cannot make a religion on such a statement: I do not know who created the world. Then what do you know? – because that is going to be the basis of any religion: the belief in God, the belief in creation. But like an innocent child, the upanishadic seer says, “I do not know who created the world.” And this is closer to truth: nobody knows who created the world. Nobody knows whether anybody ever created it – it may have been always there. And it seems most scientific that it has always been there, and it will always remain there.
The whole idea of creation is stupid. But if you drop the idea of creation you have to drop the idea of a creator God. Then you have to drop the idea of the priest and the pope and the prophets and the messiah and the saviors and the reincarnations of God. There is no God. Then from where are reincarnations happening?
I have heard…

A crazy man had applied to be given a job on a ship. He was interviewed. The captain and the high officials of the ship asked him, “If the ocean is in a turmoil and there is danger to the ship, what are you going to do?”
He said, “Simple…”
Whenever a situation like that happens, they drop heavy loads by the side of the ship, to keep the ship anchored. Those heavy loads are called anchors. So the man said, “No problem. I will just drop a big anchor.”
The captain said, “But if another great turmoil comes – because these things happen in a chain, a great wave – what you are going to do?”
He said, “The same – another anchor. And if the third one comes, another anchor, and the fourth one comes, another anchor.”
The captain said, “Stop! First tell me, where are you getting these anchors from?”
The man said, “You are just as crazy as I am. From where are you getting all these turmoils? I go on getting the anchors from the same place.”

One fallacy, one false statement, one fictitious idea gives birth to another fictitious idea.
First you ask who created the world; immediately God comes in – one anchor. But somebody is bound to ask, “Who created God?” – another anchor; a bigger God created this smaller God. But the questions cannot stop. You have started a fictitious thing; now there is no way to stop. You will have to go on creating bigger gods, and the person will have to go on getting bigger anchors.
The Upanishads are not religious scriptures. They don’t give you any belief system. They don’t tell you to believe in anything. They don’t have any God, they don’t have any creation. All that they have is a deep harmony between the master and the disciple. And that harmony brings such peace, such serenity, such tranquility, that all questions disappear – not that you found an answer, no. Just all questions disappear. The question of finding an answer does not arise. You don’t have any question, how can you have an answer?
So the Upanishads don’t have any answer for anybody. That’s why people have not taken much note of them, because they don’t have any answer for you. You have questions, you want answers.
The Upanishads don’t have any answers. They are ready to take you into a different dimension of existence, to transmute you. It is a change of consciousness. And suddenly all doubts, all questions, everything disappears and what is left behind is just a beautiful peace.
Hence, every upanishad ends with om shantih, shantih, shantih. That word shantih means absolute silence. Beyond that silence there is nothing, and there is no need. It brings total contentment, absolute blissfulness, ultimate ecstasy.
The Upanishads are the only free, absolutely free books as far as religious books are concerned. All religious books are imprisoned – Hindus have their prisons, Mohammedans have theirs, Christians have theirs. Nobody has dared to imprison the Upanishads for the simple reason that those Upanishads are of no use as far as the priesthood is concerned, creating organization is concerned, exploiting people is concerned, giving false beliefs is concerned. Those Upanishads are dangerous; it is better to keep them aside.
The moment a book becomes a holy scripture it becomes poisoned. Then it is nothing but a strategy to make more and more slaves.
The Upanishads cannot be condemned for doing any ugly thing to humanity. They have given their fragrance, they have blossomed, they have shared their joy – and with such beauty, such clarity; and without any loopholes, so that it is impossible to make them religious scriptures. They are truly religious. They are not scriptures, they are truly spiritual.
In the whole of history there are only a very few books which have remained uncontaminated by the cunningness of human mind.
The Upanishads are those few books.

Osho,
What is your business?
My business is to keep many people in business! All the religions have been teaching people to renounce the world. My business is to help people not to renounce the world. Be in business!
All the religions, without exception, are against life. My business is to destroy the conditionings that have been forced upon you against life; to give you a joy in life, to make you love life, sing, dance – because life is a celebration.
My business is to create this whole existence into a celebration.

============================================================

Osho,
Broadly speaking, as I understand it, there are two sets of rules: one for the outer world – which is the man-made world concerned with earning money, rearing children, driving on a certain side of the road – and a different set of rules for the inner world, for example, hypnosis, telepathy, mind-reading and so on to attain inner growth of consciousness, leading finally to samadhi, enlightenment, nirvana.
To live here, both rules have to be followed, and so it appears to me that friction is created. To my surprise, a farmer in Fukuoka, Japan is doing what he calls “no-farming,” or doing-nothing farming – no ploughing, no weeding, no fertilization, no pesticides – and he has had the highest yield in the last 25 years. Is such a thing also possible in other areas of activity such as business, medical practice, legal practice, service, etc? Is synchronization to some extent possible?
Osho, can you please enlighten me?
There are many questions in your one question. I will have to take all those questions one by one, only then a satisfactory answer is possible.
First you say, “It is my understanding” – it is not. It is only your thinking, and that’s the reason why the friction is felt. The friction is symbolic: you are misunderstanding thinking for understanding.
Thinking is of the mind. Understanding is of the beyond. So the first thing to be noted is that to attain to understanding one has not to become a very keen thinker. On the contrary, one has to become a no-thinker. In the state of non-thinking blossoms the flowers of understanding. Then there is no friction.
Right now you are dividing life into two kinds of rules, the outer rules and the inner rules. But this is not your vision, this is not your seeing, this is your thinking. And thinking is dualistic; the outer and the inner are categories of thinking. For understanding, there is nothing outer and nothing is inner. Existence simply is.
Or, you can say the inner and the outer are nothing but two sides of the same coin, inseparable. The question of friction does not arise, even separation is impossible. But mind lives on friction; its whole existence is that of continuous struggle, struggle against itself.
The man of understanding knows no outer, no inner. He knows only a transcendental awareness in which all outer, all inner is dissolved – and resolved.

A Japanese king went to see Lin Chi, a famous master of his time. Just as he entered the forest in which Lin Chi lived with his disciples he saw a woodcutter. Naturally he asked him, “Where can I find the master?”
For a moment the woodcutter stopped and told him, “It is here,” and again he started cutting.
The man thought, “He looks crazy… I don’t see anybody here, and this man cannot be Lin Chi. A world-famous master is not going to cut wood in the hot sun.”
Thinking that it was useless to ask him more, the king started moving farther on his way. The woodcutter laughed and he said, “It seems you can only meet him on the inner, not on the outer.”
The king was a little afraid. That man had an ax in his hand and was talking such nonsense. He said, “I will find my way. Please don’t get excited about it; just do your work.”
When he reached Lin Chi’s house he was surprised. The man who was sitting there in the master’s robe was exactly like the woodcutter. He said, “I am puzzled; do you have a twin brother?”
He said, “Yes, the outer is my twin brother. I am the inner. He cuts wood, I show the way toward the ultimate truth – but in fact we are both one.”

There is no friction in Lin Chi. But in the king’s mind there is trouble, because he divides according to the categories we have been conditioned for. How can a great master be cutting wood? Or how can a woodcutter be a great master? But can you see that there is any problem? Why cannot a great master cut wood – is there any intrinsic, logical difficulty? Why cannot a woodcutter be a master? And if a woodcutter cannot be a master, then who can be a master? There is no existential difficulty, but only a mind-created duality. There is a transcendental consciousness. Lin Chi has it.
I have both these hands. I can use both these hands because I am beyond both these hands, because I am not identified with the left hand or identified with the right hand. They are both my hands, and my existence is superior to both.
The outer rules and the inner rules are going to create friction if you don’t have the master inside you. Then naturally your left hand and right hand cannot function together in harmony – because you are dead, the master is absent.

One very famous Jaina saint died a few years ago. Now, death does not care about anybody, whether you are a saint or whether you are a sinner. The saint died in a posture which is not thought to be right, according to Jainism.
The Jaina saint, if he is really a master, must die in a lotus posture. It is significant; it means the man who is really aware will be aware of death coming. And this will be an indication that he has been ready, prepared for death to come: death will find him in the exact posture described by the Jaina scriptures. But out of a hundred, ninety-nine percent of the time it is a problem.
These so-called saints die in all kinds of postures. Then their followers have a difficulty, because if somebody comes to see then they will feel embarrassed that their saint has died in this posture – so they force the dead body into a lotus posture. And this man must have died in the night while asleep, so by the morning the body was so stiff that they had to almost break his bones, and hit him hard to put him in the right shape.
One of my friends was there who took all these pictures – and escaped with the camera, because the followers saw him taking pictures. They would have killed him because he could destroy their whole following. And a great saint… He showed me the pictures. I could not believe that followers will not leave you even when you are dead! And they were beating him, putting him into the right shape. Ordinarily, even for a person who has never been practicing the lotus posture, it is difficult. When you are dead, then to practice Yoga is really a miracle!
But they managed. For the photographs to be published in the newspaper, they managed – although you could see that the man was sitting very reluctantly. He had been beaten so hard… It is true, he was dead! But the posture was not a harmony, it was forced; the posture was as dead as the man was dead.

The problem is that by following the outer rules, following the inner rules, without knowing who it is who is being forced to follow the outer rules, the inner rules, you are going to create a thousand and one frictions. On each step there is going to be difficulty. The outer rule says one thing and the inner rule may say exactly the opposite, and you will be torn apart.
The outer rule says: “Love your wife, love your children, love your family, love your neighborhood, love the people around you, because that is the only way to live with these people, that is the only way to be related to them.” And the inner rule says, “Wife? – she is the sure door to hell!” Now there is friction: how to love hell?
But people are great artists; they manage both. Deep down they know this woman is hell, and on the surface they say, “Darling, I love you. I will die without you.” And they are hoping inside that somehow, if this woman dies…
But the women are so strong that every husband pops off, and the woman remains to see him pop! Unless he pops off, she is not going to leave the world. Women have a five-year-longer life span.
I have heard…

A woman was dying and the husband was trying to bring tears to his eyes. It is a difficult job when your whole being wants to dance, when you want to burst into a film song. So he was putting some spicy thing into his eyes to bring tears. But you cannot deceive a woman – particularly no husband can deceive a wife; it has never happened.
She said, “Stop all this nonsense. Just promise me one thing: that you are not going to marry the woman who lives in the neighborhood.”
The man said, “Don’t be afraid. And, anyway, your clothes will not fit her. I promise I will not marry her; your clothes won’t fit her.”

You cannot hide. Your inner and outer are constantly in friction, everywhere. You are asked by your elders, by your religious teachers, to be truthful – because lying is one of the worst crimes, a sin for which you will suffer much.

One old swami, a traditional swami, Swami Divyanand, used to stay with my family whenever he would come that way, at least once a year. And truth was his main theme. One afternoon he was resting. He had the body of a Hindu monk, and as you know… He was resting, but giving as much trouble to the bed as possible.
Hindu monks have a strange way of growing fat. They know no limits. Perhaps they are in the search of the unlimited.
And at that very time a man came to the door, and he was asking the servant, “If Swamiji is awake I would like to see him.”
And I was sitting with Swamiji, who was fully awake. He immediately closed his eyes. I said, “Swamiji, this is not right; it is against truth.”
He said, “Be silent! That man is such a bore.”
I said, “Nobody can be a bigger bore than you are. Year by year you have bored this poor family.”
He said, “This is no time to discuss it” – and he was with closed eyes, snoring!
I shook his big belly and I said, “You cannot deceive me by snoring. This snoring is absolutely false.”
He said, “It is authentic.”
I said, “You are perfectly awake. How can your snoring be authentic?”
He said, “Just… It is so hot, and that man is so boring and he will not leave me for hours. Just go and tell him that Swamiji is fast asleep.”
I said, “I will go and I will say exactly what you are saying.”
And I told the man, “Swamiji is fully awake, yet fast asleep; fully awake, yet snoring.”
That man said, “How can it happen?”
I said, “You know, these people are miracle-makers. You can come with me, I can show you.” I took him inside with me.
Swamiji was snoring very loudly, as loudly as he could manage. But you cannot snore for long if you are awake, it is so tiring. I told the man to sit in a corner where it was a little dark. Swamiji opened one eye, looked at me and said, “Has that bore gone?”
I said, “Swamiji, continue snoring. He is just sitting here in the dark corner.”
He said, “How has he managed to come here?”
I said, “This is no time to discuss it. Simply close your eyes.” And he closed his eyes and started snoring.
And that man said, “This swami is continually talking about being true.”
I said, “I think he is being true – eyes closed, snoring; what more do you want? Do you want him to die? Will you leave this place only when he dies?”
This was too much. Swamiji stood and said, “I cannot do that.”
I said, “You don’t come into this. Don’t interfere. Simply lie down and rest and snore – whether awake or asleep, that is your business. I am just trying to convince this man that Swamiji is a man of miracles: ‘You have just seen how he can open one eye. It is very difficult, only swamis can do that; otherwise both eyes open together.’”
He was very angry at me. He talked against me to everybody in the family, that “This boy should not be allowed in my room.”
But I said, “I was simply following your teaching.”
He said, “Teachings are not to be followed, they are to be taught!”

The mind cannot create a harmony; that is not in the nature of mind. Its nature is dialectical, discordant. But if you can go beyond mind suddenly all conflict, all friction disappears. Not that you have to do something, you simply become alert, whatever you are doing. It is no longer a question of inner or outer, it is a question of being aware. And with awareness, you cannot do anything wrong. That is impossible. Nobody has been able to manage it yet.
You have been asking about a Japanese farmer who has not been using any scientific technology in cultivating. He calls it no-cultivation. It is in tune with the Zen idea of effortless effort, of no drama. His cultivation is just an extension of a meditative state of consciousness. He has found harmony within himself, and he has found harmony with nature.
Once you have found harmony within yourself it is not difficult to find harmony with nature. You are part of nature. You are nature. Nature is bigger you; you are smaller nature. There is no difference, no demarcation line.
He used this insight in cultivation, without using any technological support. For twenty-five years he has been bringing up the highest crops in the whole of Japan, when others are using everything. He has slapped the face of man really badly; his small effort is not small. He has indicated a totally different approach to relating with life.
But your mind is not in any way in contact with harmony. It is shown in the question. You are asking, can this be done in business? Now, business is not nature. Can it be done in service? Service is not nature. You will create a great rift in yourself, you will create trouble.
If you are a government servant and you say, “I follow the philosophy of no-service, like no-cultivation,” you will be thrown out. And it will be very compassionate of your officers if they only throw you out; otherwise they would throw you into a madhouse. No-service? A railway driver saying, “No-driving”; an airplane pilot just in the middle of the air saying, “No-piloting; I am going to leave it to the harmony of nature, and now see the miracles.” You will see only dead bodies and a disaster, no miracle – because these things are not part of nature.
Yes, in gardening you can do it. In anything that is not man-made, that is not manufactured by man’s mind but is part of natural growth, it can be done. But before you can do it you have to be in a certain state of consciousness otherwise you are going to fail, even in cultivation.
Do you think the whole world is blind to the fact of this strange cultivator who has not been defeated for twenty-five years – with all your technology, manure, chemical support? No, many others must have tried but nothing happens, because the question is not there in the cultivation, the real thing has to be decided in the cultivator. First he has to come to a harmony with nature, first he has to bridge himself with nature.
That you cannot see. You can only see his crops growing higher than anybody else’s, growing thicker than anybody else’s, but you can’t see that there is something invisible which is the cause of the whole phenomenon. Otherwise why are other Japanese farmers not using the same method? Why waste money in technology? But you cannot, because the essential point is not in the crops, the essential point is the man’s consciousness.
He has come to such a silent merger, to such a silent meeting of love, to such an orgasmic experience with nature that it is not nature growing, it is he himself growing. There is no cultivator, there is no cultivation.
You have heard only one thing: no-cultivation. Remember, there is no cultivator either. There is a silent communion, no division between the doer and the doing – both are one, totally one. In their total oneness, the miracle is happening.
The miracle can happen all over the world, particularly as far as existence is concerned. But with man-manufactured things it will not be of any help because they are dead. You cannot come to a communion with a dead thing. Existence is alive, vibrating; you just have to get into the same rhythm. The moment you are in the same rhythm, miracles are possible.
In fact if this can happen on a wider scale there is no need for any stupid things like plastic. Now all over the world the scientists are concerned, “What are we going to do with the plastic?” – because, at the bottom, all the seas are full of plastic. Plastic is so cheap that it is disposable, you need not use it twice. Even for an injection a plastic syringe is used only once and then thrown away; it is cheaper, simpler, less dangerous.
But all that plastic goes on into the earth, into the ocean, and it cannot mix. It is one of the strangest things that man has made – it cannot dissolve back into earth, it remains. It is the only eternal thing you have in the world.
Everything that goes to the earth dissolves sooner or later into its basic constituents, but the plastic remains. Its resistance is immense. And it has started showing its effects: in many places suddenly thousands of fish have died because the plastic poisoned the waters. And there is no way to remove it – and where to remove it to?
The factories go on pouring out more and more plastic. They are really thinking to change your hearts into plastic hearts – because they will be more reliable, certainly. A plastic heart cannot have a heart failure. Whatever you do – you may fail, the heart will continue! It is the strangest thing we have produced: the man dies and the heart is alive. You take the heart, clean it, and fix it into somebody else.
What the Japanese Zen farmer has done, a simple man, can be done all over the earth – just a harmony is needed. And sometimes it happens without your knowing, because you are not alert to the fact, you never take note of it.

When I came for the first time to the desert that we had purchased in America, there was not a single bird. It was a strange place, like some modern paintings which give you such a strange feeling. There was not a single bird in over one hundred and twenty-six square miles, and only one kind of tree which is called the camel of the desert, the juniper tree. It is really a great tree; no other tree can remain alive in that desert, but the juniper remains. But they were small: the growth was difficult – they were not green, not lush green.
But in five years’ time, as thousands of sannyasins gathered there – as we made lakes, as we started cultivating – strangely enough I saw those juniper trees growing thicker, greener, becoming more beautiful.
Birds started coming, water birds started coming, and so many deer that in the night it was impossible to move your car on the roads because they were standing and they would not move; they didn’t care about your horn. One thing is certain: they knew that these people were harmless, that they are not going to hurt them. Otherwise deer immediately run away as they see a man coming, particularly in America where they are continually hunting the deer, killing the deer. In the whole history of America perhaps these five years in the commune were the only years when deer were protected.
We had to fight a lawsuit against the government. The people who used to hunt deer filed a suit against us because we didn’t allow them to enter and we didn’t allow shooting. And we had to convince the court: “We are vegetarians and we will not allow anybody to kill on our ground. They can do anything they want on their own grounds, but these one hundred and twenty-six square miles are sacred; they belong to us, and they belong to the deer too. We are newcomers, they are ancient owners of the land. We will be gone, they will remain. We are their guests, and we cannot be so ugly as to kill the host.”
The magistrate could not believe what we were talking about! But the deer understood – so from all the surrounding lands they started gathering in thousands, in the mountains, in the forest of the commune. Suddenly, within five years, a desert which had always been a desert became an oasis. And I was watching the synchronicity of life: when there are people, when there are trees, the birds will come. When there are birds, people, trees, the animals will come.
We had swans, we had ducks. We had three hundred peacocks. It was a dream come true. Peacocks were dancing and human beings were dancing too, and there was a certain affinity, a friendship. The peacocks were not allowed in the houses because they would make the houses dirty, but they would come to the windows and look inside to see what was going on – the same curiosity, the same consciousness, just the body is different; the same sensitivity, the same desire to relate in some way, to be friendly.

This experiment can succeed as far as nature is concerned; not with machines and not with man-created things like business. You cannot just sit with a pile of banknotes – sitting silently, doing nothing, spring never comes – and the pile disappears! Because others are watching… Just let him close his eyes. This idiot is going to close his eyes. How long is he going to sit doing nothing? Sooner or later he will close his eyes and the pile of notes will disappear. And he was waiting to see the notes grow – notes don’t grow.
So remember one thing, that first you need a transcendental self which is neither outer nor inner. And second, you have to be aware that you can succeed only with nature, with the cosmos; but that is real success.
That poor man in Japan is showing something immensely great, far more important than nuclear weapons – because nuclear weapons can destroy the whole world, still they are not important. This man is showing a harmony which can save the whole of life, can fill the whole of life with new juice, with new love, with new dance, with new song, and that is far more important.

Osho,
Two sardarjis were driving along in the front seat of their car. As they approached a corner, the one who was driving said to his friend, “Sardarji, will you look out of the window and see if the indicator, the turn signal, is working?”
He promptly leaned out of the window and looked at the indicator light and shouted back at his friend, “Yes it is – no it's not, yes it is – no it's not, yes it is – no it's not.”
Osho, if anybody were to ask me whether I was witnessing or not, my answer would have to be the same: Yes I am, no I'm not; yes I am, no I'm not.
Is it like that all the way home?
It is not, because as far as your witnessing is concerned, it may be coming and going, and your answer may be perfectly the same as the sardar who said that the indicator is working, “Yes – no – yes again.”
That is the function of the indicator: to be, not to be; to be, not to be.
But don’t laugh at the poor sardarji. As far as his awareness is concerned, he is fully aware. Whenever it is working he says yes, whenever it is not working he says no. His awareness of the indicator is continuous. The indicator goes on changing, but the sardar remains fully aware of when it is working, when it is not working, when it is on, when it is off. His awareness is a continuity.
If you can give the same answer about your witnessing: yes I am witnessing, no I am not witnessing, yes I am witnessing, no I am not witnessing, then you have to remember that there is something more behind these witnessing moments which is witnessing all this process. Who is witnessing that sometimes you are witnessing and sometimes you are not witnessing? Something is constant.
Your witnessing has become just an indicator; don’t be bothered by it. Your emphasis should be on the eternal, the constant, the continuum – and it is there. And it is in everyone, we have just forgotten it.
But even in times when we have forgotten it, it is there in its absolute perfection. It is like a mirror which is able to mirror everything, is still mirroring everything, but you are standing with your back toward the mirror. The poor mirror is mirroring your back.
Turn, it will mirror your face. Open your heart; it will mirror your heart. Put everything on the table, don’t even hide a single card and it will reflect your whole reality.
But if you go on standing with your back to the mirror looking all around the world asking people, “Who am I?” then it is up to you, because there are idiots who will come and teach you that “This is the way. Do this and you will know who you are.” No method is needed, just a one-hundred-and-eighty-degree turn – and that is not a method. And the mirror is your very being.
You may not have looked at the joke in this light. If you tell the joke to anybody he is going to laugh because the sardar is so stupid, because that is the function of the indicator – to be on, off, on, off. But you have brought me a joke. I cannot simply laugh at it because I see something more in it which perhaps nobody will see. The sardar is constant, alert. He does not miss a single point, a single moment.
And when you say, witnessing, yes, and then it disappears and you say no – again it appears, you say yes… It simply shows that there is something behind all these moments of witnessing and not witnessing. The true witness, which is reflecting the changing process of what you think is your witness, is behind. It is not the true witness, it is only the indicator. Forget the indicator.
Remember the constant mirroring that goes on twenty-four hours within you, silently watching everything. Slowly, slowly clean it – there is so much dust on it, centuries of dust. Remove the dust.
And one day, when the mirror is completely clean, those moments of witnessing and not-witnessing will disappear; you will be simply a witness.
And unless you find that eternity of witnessing, all other kinds of witnessing are part of mind. They have no value.

Osho,
You had suggested to me to combine dancing and listening to music, and doing this keeps me happy. But I also have to move to the other side: of sadness. Whenever I go to sleep in the night awareness starts happening naturally and to avoid it I turn and toss in the bed. Sleep is difficult. What to do to forget awareness in the night?
I also see that there is no harm in being awake in the night, and I sometimes enjoy it as new spaces are discovered. This awareness also keeps me silent and helps me avoid moving from happiness to sadness, and vice versa. I prefer silence to moving from happiness to sadness, because I hate sadness, even though it may be deeper.
What are your suggestions about this? Osho, please comment.
Your question has its answer in itself.
First, it happens to every meditator – everyone who is trying to be awake and alert – that sleep in the night becomes difficult. But if it creates no problems for you and the next morning you are not tired, just resting without sleep has rejuvenated your body and you feel fresh, there is no problem. It is good. Sleep is no longer your necessity.
Secondly, it helps you to remain more balanced. You are no longer like a pendulum moving between sadness and silence. If you remain awake the whole night just resting, relaxing, it is already indicating to you the way, that you are on the right path.
Silence is a reward. Tranquility is a reward; being balanced between polarities is a reward.
So unless somebody feels that sleep is still a necessity for him – that without it he finds himself tired, without it he finds himself getting crazy, tense – then only does it become a problem. In that case, only in that case, you are not to meditate in the evening. You have to meditate early in the morning. Then get up at four and just meditate for two or three hours and drop it. It will continue to work inside you, but it has to be at least twelve hours away from your sleeping time; otherwise it is such a force that if you are meditating in the night –trying to be aware on the one hand and on the other hand trying to be asleep – sleep cannot win.
Sleep is a poor thing. The awareness that is coming to you is so deep and so great, that in the flood of awareness all your sleep will be gone. But if it is not creating any problem, then you are blessed. For almost ninety-five percent of meditators it does not create any problem; only in five percent of people does it create some problem. Those five percent of people can be given different suggestions after looking at their different situations. But for ninety-five percent there is no problem at all; in fact you will feel younger, fresher, more in tune with yourself and the world, more together.
The third thing that I want to say to you is: don’t hate anything. Even hate is included, because it makes no difference what the object of hate is; it may be the hate itself. But don’t hate – not simply as a discipline, but as part of an understanding that the same energy which becomes love, becomes hate.
When the same energy can become love, then you are being simply stupid in using that energy as hate – because the hate will create wounds in you. It is not going to harm anybody else except you. And love would have created flowers in the place of wounds in you; it was not going to help anybody else except you. So it is simply a question of intelligence.
Hate is destructive, self-destructive. Love is tremendous respect for oneself. You may hate anything, anybody, hate itself; but in every way you will find yourself low-energy. Hate sucks your energy, leaves you empty, spent. Love fills you with energy, with overflowing energy; not only healing you, but creating an aura around you in which others may be healed.
It is not a question of religion – that hate is bad or immoral. It is a question of intelligence: hate is stupid and love is intelligent.

Osho,
The more I am able to absorb you, the more thirsty I become. Please talk about meditation and passion.
There is no harm in becoming more thirsty for truth. There is no harm in becoming more thirsty for new spaces of experience, new challenges, voyages to new stars in your innermost being. I call it divine discontentment.
Only the fools are contented. You can see it. Watch a donkey, how contented he looks! He should be worshipped by all religious people. You cannot find a more contented being – having nothing; but you will never see him frustrated, in despair, freaking out. In the world of donkeys even psychotherapies don’t exist. Donkeys don’t need any psychotherapist. But it is not a quality; it is not to be praised, it is a condemnation. The man of any worth is discontented.
The smaller men are discontented about smaller things: money, power, prestige. These are not very far away from the donkeys – cousin-brothers. There is just a difference of a few inches between the donkeys and the presidents and prime ministers.
The higher-quality man, the man of superiority, the man who has the potential of growing into a Gautam Buddha, into a Mahavira, into a Zarathustra, will also be discontented – although his discontent is totally different, his dimension is different. He is not discontented because he wants to have more things, he is discontented because he wants to be more – not to have more, but to be more. He wants more being, he wants more awareness, he wants more alertness. He wants more lovingness, he wants more compassion. He wants the whole sky and all the stars within him. His discontent is immense.
These smaller people who are discontented for money and power and prestige may find them, and then they will be utterly frustrated. Their whole joy is in the hope, not in the finding. The moment they find, they see that they have been running after shadows.
But the really discontented man goes on becoming more and more thirsty, because each step brings him to such immense ecstasies that he cannot stop searching for more. His search is eternal. It is not that what he finds is frustrating, no. It is because what he finds is so satisfying that naturally he wants to go beyond it; there must be more, existence cannot be so limited. It is perfectly good that the more you listen to me the more thirsty you become.
Move on. Have an infinite thirst so that your journey toward the truth is unending; you are always, always coming and never reaching.
You have also asked that I say something about meditation and passion. Superficially it will look very strange – why are you putting these two together? – but they are together. It is only the more passionate man who becomes a meditator. His passion is so much that nothing ordinary can satisfy it; everything proves small. His passion is so big.
This has never been said as clearly as I am saying it: as proof, I can tell you that no impotent man in the whole history of man has ever become enlightened. Strange – if your religious people are right, then all impotent people should have become enlightened because they are the real celibates. Their celibacy is absolutely certain, nobody else’s is certain; everybody else’s celibacy is uncertain.
It is the more passionate one who cannot be satisfied by toys, who soon gets fed up with money, with men, with women, with being a celebrity, with fame, with name. They soon become fed up with everything that it is not the real thing. They want the real thing. Their passion is such that unless they find the truth they will not be satisfied.
So there is a relationship: only the passionate ones have become great meditators. And the overflowing energy of passion… Unless it is too much it cannot move upward – otherwise it is enough for the biological needs of creating children. When it is too much, then it is bound to rise beyond the boundaries of biology – and that’s how we have found the stages of where it moves in the inner world of man.
There are seven stages. At the seventh stage, when it reaches to the highest point in the head, it explodes, as if into thousands of suns. That’s what we have called enlightenment. It is the same energy that expresses itself in sex, creates life; it is the same energy, moving upward in different stages.
For example, when it is near the heart it creates a tremendous power of love. When it is near the throat it creates a great power in music, poetry, the authority of every single word uttered. It is the same energy when it reaches to the third-eye center, between the two eyebrows; then a man becomes hypnotic, without his effort. Just to be in his presence, you suddenly find yourself agreeing with him. It is not a question of argument; you fall into the same rhythm.
This kind of man never tries to convert anybody. Just by chance, if anybody comes close to him, he is bound to be converted. And this is true conversion because it is a transformation: the man will never be the same again.
It is when the same energy is moving beyond the sixth center, the third eye, to the seventh, sahasrar, that one attains to samadhi. But it is the same energy that we used to call passion; at the lowest level it is passion, at the highest level it is compassion.