---
title: The Ultimate Alchemy Vol 1 01
series: The Ultimate Alchemy Vol 1 01-10
talk_number: 1
url: https://oshoworld.com/the-ultimate-alchemy-vol-1-01
language: English
duration: 01:50:30
author: THE UPANISHADS
scraped_at: 2026-01-03T09:34:47.549081+00:00
---
Aum
Tasya nishchintanam dhyanam.

Aum
Meditation is the constant contemplation of That.
There are some points to ponder over before we step into the unknown. The unknown is the message of the Upanishads. The basic, the most foundational, always remains unknown; that which we know is always superficial. So some points must be understood before we can go deep into the realm of the unknown. These three words – the known, the unknown and the unknowable – must be understood first, because the Upanishads are concerned with the unknown only as a beginning. They end in the unknowable. The known realm becomes science, the unknown is philosophy and the unknowable belongs to religion.
Philosophy is the link between the known and the unknowable, between science and religion. Philosophy is totally concerned with the unknown. The moment something becomes known it becomes part of science; it no longer remains a part of philosophy. So the more science grows, the more philosophy is pushed ahead. The field that becomes known becomes science, and philosophy is the link between science and religion. So as science progresses, philosophy has to be pushed ahead – because it can only be concerned with the unknown. But the more philosophy proceeds ahead, the more religion is pushed ahead – because religion is basically concerned with the unknowable.
The Upanishads begin with the unknown; they end with the unknowable. That’s how misunderstanding arises. Professor M. G. Ranade has written a very deep book on the philosophy of the Upanishads, but it remains only a beginning, it cannot penetrate the deeper valleys of the Upanishadic mystery because it remains philosophical. The Upanishads begin with philosophy, but that is only a beginning. They end in religion, in the unknowable. When I say “unknowable,” I mean that which cannot be known.
Whatsoever the effort may be, howsoever we may try, the moment we know something it becomes part of science, the moment we feel something as unknown it is part of philosophy, the moment we encounter the unknowable – only then is it religion. When I say the unknowable, I mean that which cannot be known but which can be encountered; it can be felt, it can even be lived. You can be face to face with it. It can be encountered, but still it remains unknowable. Only this much is felt – that now we are deep in a mystery which cannot be solved. So before we enter this mystery some points have to be understood, otherwise there will be no entrance.
One is: how to listen, because there are different dimensions of listening. You can listen with your intellect, with your reason, mm? – that is one way of listening to a thing: the most common, the most ordinary and the most shallow, because with reason you are always either in defense or in attack. You are always fighting with reason, so whenever someone tries to understand something through reason he is fighting with the thing. At the most a very rudimentary understanding is possible, just an acquaintance is possible. The deeper meaning is bound to be missed because the deeper meaning needs a very sympathetic listening.
Reason can never listen with sympathy. It listens with a very argumentative background. It can never listen with love; that is impossible. So listening with reason is good if you are trying to understand mathematics, if you are trying to understand logic, if you are trying to understand any system which is totally rational.
If you listen to poetry with reason, then you will be blind. It is as if one is trying to see with one’s ears or to hear with one’s eyes. You cannot understand poetry through reason. So there is a deeper understanding – the second type of understanding – which is not through reason but through love, through feeling, through emotion, through heart.
Reason is always in conflict; reason will not allow anything to pass in easily. It must be defeated; only then can something penetrate. It is an armor around the mind; it is a defense method, a defense measure. It is alert every moment that nothing should pass it unawares, and that nothing should be allowed in – unless reason is defeated. And even when reason is defeated the thing is not going into your heart, because in defeat you cannot feel sympathetic.
The second dimension of listening is through heart, through feeling. Someone is listening to music; then no analysis is needed. Of course if you are a critic, then you will not be able to understand music. You may be able to understand the mathematics, the meter, the language, everything about music – but never the music itself, because music cannot be analyzed. It is a whole. It is a totality. If you wait for a single second to analyze it you have missed much. It is a flowing totality. Of course paper music can be analyzed, but never real music when it is playing. So you cannot stand aloof, you cannot be an observer; you have to be a participant. If you participate, only then do you understand.
So through feeling…the way of understanding is through participation. You cannot be an observer, you cannot stand outside. You cannot make music an object. You have to flow with it, you have to be deeply in love with it. There will be moments when you will not be and only music will be there. Those will be the peaks; those moments will be the moments of music. Then something penetrates to your deeper being. This is a deeper way to listen, but it is still not the deepest.
The first way is through reason – rational; the second is through feeling – emotional; and the third is through being – existential. When you listen through your reason, you are listening through one part of your being. Again, when you listen through your feeling, you are listening through one part of your being. The third, the deepest, the most authentic dimension of listening, is through your totality – body, mind, spirit – as a whole, as a oneness. If you understand this third way, only then will you be able to penetrate the mystery of the Upanishad.
The traditional term for the third listening is “faith.” So we can divide through reason, the method is doubt; through feeling the method is love, sympathy; through being the method is faith, trust – because if we are going into the unknown, how can you doubt? You can doubt the known, but that which is not known at all – how can you doubt it?
Doubt becomes valid if it is concerned with the known. With the unknown, doubt is just impossible. How can you love the unknown? You can love the known; you cannot love the unknown, you cannot create a relationship with the unknown. Relationship is impossible; you cannot relate with it. You can dissolve into it – that is another thing – but you cannot relate with it. You can surrender to it, but you cannot relate to it. Surrender is not a relationship. It is not a relationship at all. It is just dissolving the duality.
So with reason the duality remains: you are in conflict with the other. With love the duality remains: you are in sympathy with the other. But with being the duality dissolves: you are neither in conflict nor in love, you are not related at all. This third is known traditionally as faith, trust – shraddha. As far as the unknown is concerned, faith is the key.
If someone says, “How can I believe,” then he misunderstands, then he misses the very point. Faith is not belief. Belief is, again, a rational thing. You can believe, you can disbelieve. You can believe because you have arguments for believing, you can disbelieve because you have arguments for disbelieving. Belief is never deeper than reason. So theists, atheists, believers, nonbelievers, they all belong to the most shallow realm. Faith is not belief because for the unknown there is no reason for or against. You can neither believe nor disbelieve.
So what remains to be done? You can either be open to it or you can be closed to it. It is not a question of believing or not believing, it is a question of being open or being closed to it. If you trust, then you open. If you distrust, then you remain closed. This is just a key. If you want to open to the unknown then you will have to be in trust, in faith. If you do not want to be open to it you can remain closed – but no one is missing except you, no one is at a loss except you. You will remain closed like a seed. When I say it, I mean it.
A seed has to break, has to die, only then is the tree born. But the seed has never known the tree. The dying of the seed can happen only in faith. The tree is unknown, and the seed will never meet the tree. The seed can remain closed in fear, in fear of death – then the seed will remain a seed and ultimately will die without being reborn. But if the seed can die in faith that the unknown may be born out of its death, only then does it open. In a way it dies, in a way it is reborn – reborn into greater mysteries, reborn into a richer life. The same is the phenomenon with faith. So it is not belief: never misunderstand it as belief. It is not feeling. It is deeper than both. It is your totality.
So how to listen with one’s totality? – with neither reason functioning in antagonism nor feeling functioning in sympathy, but with the totality of one’s being. How can the totality function? – because we know only functions of the parts, we do not know how the totality functions. We know only parts – this part functioning, that part functioning; intellect working, the heart functioning, the legs moving, the eyes seeing…. We know only parts functioning. How does the totality function? The totality functions only in a deep passivity. Nothing is active, everything is silent, you are not doing anything. You are just here – just presence – and the doors open. Only then will you be able to understand what the Upanishad’s message is. So your simple presence is needed – no doing on your part, no functioning. That is what is meant by “total functioning” – just your presence.
I must make it more clear what I mean by “just presence.” If you are in love with someone, then there are moments when you are not doing anything. You are just present by your lover’s or beloved’s side: just present, totally silent; you are not even loving each other – just present. A very strange phenomenon happens. Ordinarily our existence is linear. We exist in a line, in a sequence – my past, my present, my future; this is a line. I move on my track, you move on your track. We have our tracks, linear tracks. Really, we never meet. We are parallel lines – no meeting. Even if we are crowded there is no meeting because you are on your track and I am on my track. You belong to your past, I belong to my past; my present is born out of my past, your present is born out of your past. Your future will be a causal sequence of your past and present, and mine will be of mine.
So we move on tracks – linear tracks, one-line tracks. There is no meeting. Only lovers meet because suddenly, when you are just present with someone, a different time comes into existence. You both meet in a single moment, and this moment neither belongs to you nor to your lover. This is something new. This is neither out of your past nor out of your lover’s past. Time moves in a different dimension – not linear, not from the past to the future, but one present to another present. There is a meeting between two present moments – a different dimension. This dimension is known as the dimension of eternity. So lovers have said that one moment of love is eternity unto itself. It never ends. It has no future, it has no past. It is just present, here and now.
This is what I mean when I say you can listen in such a totality that in your present moment only your presence remains: not with your past, not with your future. Then this very moment is enough – silent, passive, just present here and now, then a different dimension will open. The Upanishadic message can penetrate only in that dimension.
That is what is meant when it is said that the essence of the Upanishads is eternal. It does not mean permanent, it only means a different dimension of time in which there is no future and no past. So you will have to move in a different way – in your inner time. And with that inner change, words begin to take a different shape and a different significance is born out of them.
We use similar words. Everyone uses the same words, but with a different mind the words have a different meaning. For example, a doctor asks a patient, “How are you?” and at a casual meeting on the street you ask someone, “How are you?” and a lover asks a beloved, “How are you?” The words are the same, but is the meaning the same? When a doctor asks a patient, “How are you?” does it mean the same as when a lover asks a beloved, “How are you?” A different significance comes into being.
The Upanishads cannot be understood in an ordinary way. That is how scholars miss the whole point, linguists miss the whole point. Pundits miss the whole point because they work with language, with grammar, with everything that is pertinent, but still they miss. Why do they miss? The missing happens because their inner time is linear. They are working with their intellect, not with their being. Really, they are working on the Upanishad, they are not allowing the Upanishad to work upon them. That is what I mean when I say to just be present, then the Upanishad can work upon you – and that can be a transformation. That can transport you to different planes of existence.
So the first thing to remember is how to listen just by your presence. Absorb through your faith and trust – drink! Do not fight with reason, do not feel with feeling. Just be one with your being. This is the key – the first thing.
The second thing is that the Upanishads use words – they have to – but they stand for silence. They talk and they talk continuously, but they talk for silence. The effort is absurd, paradoxical, contradictory, inconsistent – but this is how it is possible, this is the only way. Even if I have to provoke you toward silence I have to use words. They use words, but they are completely against words and language; they are not for them. This must be remembered continuously, otherwise it is very easy to be lost in words.
Words have their own magic, they have their own magnetism, and each word creates a sequence of its own. Novelists know, poets know: they say sometimes they only begin their novel. When it ends, they cannot say they have ended it. Really, the words have their own sequence. They begin to be alive in their own way, and then they go on.
Tolstoy has said somewhere, “I begin, but I never end, and sometimes my own characters say things that I never wanted to say.” They begin to have their own life and they go on their own tracks. They become free from the author, from the novelist, from the poet. They become as free as children become free from their parents. They have their own life.
So words have their own logic. Use a word, and you are on a track. And the word will create many things. The word itself will create many things, and one can be lost. But the Upanishads are not for words. That is why they use as few as possible. Their message is so telegraphic that not a single word is used unnecessarily. The Upanishads are the shortest treatises; not a single word is used unnecessarily, because words can create a hypnotic sequence. But words have to be used, so be aware that you are not lost in words.
Meaning is something different. Even more than “meaning” – it would be good to use the word significance. The Upanishads use words as signs, as symbols, as indications. They use words to show something, not to say something. You can say something by your words, you can show something by your words. When you show something, then the word must be transcended, must be forgotten; otherwise words come in the eyes and they distort the whole perception.
We will be using words, but with this caution: go on remembering that not only are meanings given, but some indications. The words have been used symbolically – just like “a finger pointing to the moon.” The finger is not the moon, but one can cling to the finger and one can say, “My teacher showed me – this is the moon!” The finger is not the moon, but the finger can be used to show. The word is never the truth, but words can be used to show. So always remember that the finger has to be forgotten. If the finger becomes more significant and important than the moon then the whole thing will be perverted.
Remember this second point: words are just indicators to something else which is wordless – something which is silent, something which is beyond, something which transcends.
This forgetting that words are not realities has created much confusion. There are thousands and thousands of commentaries, but they are concerned with words, not with the wordless reality. They go on discussing…. For centuries, millennia, pundits have discussed what this word means and what that word means and they have created much literature. But so much search for meaning – and totally meaningless! They have missed the point: the words were never meant to be realities, only pointers towards something else totally different from words.
Thirdly: I am not going to comment on the Upanishad, because commentary can only be something concerned with intellect. Rather, I am going to respond, not comment. Response is a different thing – altogether different. You whistle in a valley or you sing a song or you play on a bamboo flute and the valley echoes, re-echoes, re-echoes. The valley is not commenting: the valley is responding.
A response is a living thing; a commentary is bound to be dead. A response means that the Upanishad will be read here – I will not comment on it, I will just become a valley and give an echo. It will be difficult to understand it because even if the echo is authentic you may not be able to get the same sound back. You may not be able to find out the relevance because when a valley responds, when it echoes something, that echo is not just a passive echo; it is creative. The valley adds much, the nature of the valley adds much. A different valley will echo differently. That is how things should be. So when I say something, it is not meant that everyone is bound to say this. This is how my valley echoes it.
I am reminded of Stevens’ lines. They look like a Zen poem: “Twenty men crossing a bridge into a village, are twenty men crossing twenty bridges into twenty villages.” When I read some-thing, my valley echoes in a certain way; it is not passive; in that echo I am also present. When your valley re-echoes it, it will be a different thing. When I say “a living response,” I mean this.
Sometimes it may look absolutely irrelevant because the valley will give it a shape, a color of its own. This is natural. So I say that commentaries are criminal; there should only be responses, no commentaries – because the commentator begins to feel that whatsoever he is saying is absolutely true. A commentator begins to feel that other commentators are wrong, and he begins to feel a self-imposed duty to criticize other commentators because he feels his commentary can be right only when other’s commentaries are wrong. But that is not the case with a response. Multi-responses are possible, and every response is right if it is authentic. If it comes from your depths, then it is right. There is no outward criterion of what is right and what is wrong. If something comes out of you from your depths, if you become one with it, if it vibrates through your whole being, then it is right. Otherwise howsoever clever and howsoever logical, it is wrong.
This is going to be a response. And when I say “response,” I mean it will be more like poetry and less like philosophy. It will not be a system. You cannot create systems through responses. Responses are atomic, fragmentary. They have an inner unity, but to find that inner unity is not so easy. The unity is just like a mainland and an island: between an island and a mainland there is a unity, but deep down, deep down in the depths of the sea, the land is one. If that is understood, then no man is an island. Deep down things are one. The deeper you go, the more you reach to the oneness. So if a response is authentic then any response, even the opposite response which may look absolutely contradictory to it, cannot be different. Deep down there will be a unity.
But one has to go deep, and commentaries are superficial things. So I am not going to give you a commentary. I will not say what this Upanishad means. I will say only what this Upanishad means in me. I cannot claim any authority, and those who claim are really immoral. No one can say what this Upanishad means. All that can be said is what this Upanishad means in me – how I echo it.
This response can create a responsiveness in you also if you are just present here. Then whatsoever I say will echo in you also, and if it can echo, only then will you be able to understand it. So just be like a valley, be in a let-go, so that you can echo freely. Be concerned with yourself being a valley rather than with the text of the Upanishad or with what I am saying. Be concerned with yourself being a valley and all else will follow. No tension is needed, no strained effort is needed to understand me – that can become a barrier. Just relax, just be silent and passive and let whatsoever happens echo in you. Those vibrations will transport you to a different perspective, to a different vision.
Lastly: I am not a Hindu, neither am I Mohammedan nor a Christian…a homeless wanderer. So I do not belong to the tradition of the Upanishads outwardly, I have no investment in them. When a Hindu comments or when a Hindu thinks about the Upanishads he has investments. When a Mohammedan writes about the Upanishads he has anti-investments; they cannot be true and authentic. If one is a Hindu he cannot be true about the Upanishads; if one is a Mohammedan he cannot be true about the Upanishads, he is bound to lie. But the deception is so subtle that one may not even be aware.
Man is the only animal who can lie to himself and can live in deceptions. If you are a Hindu and are thinking about the Upanishads, or a Mohammedan and thinking about the Koran, or a Christian and thinking about the New Testament, you will never be aware that you cannot be true. Your being a Christian is the barrier. You cannot be true! One must not belong, only then is the response true. Belonging disturbs, perverts the mind, distracts and projects things which are not or denies things which are.
So to me that is not a problem, and for you also I would suggest that when you are reading the Koran, listening to the Upanishads or to the Bible, do not be Hindus, Christians and Mohammedans at all – just being is enough. You will be able to penetrate deeper. With concepts, with dogmas, you are never open, and a closed mind can create deceptions of understanding, but can never understand.
So I belong to no one, and if I am responding to this Upanishad it is simply because I have fallen in love with it. This, one of the shortest Upanishads, “Atma Pooja,” is a rare phenomenon. So something about this rare Upanishad, why I have chosen to talk about it.
Firstly, it is the shortest, it is just seedlike – potent, pregnant, with much in it. Every word is a seed with infinite possibilities, so you can echo it and re-echo it infinitely, and the more you ponder over it, the more you allow it to go in, the more, newer significances will be revealed. These seedlike words show that they were found in deep silence. Really, this looks strange, but this is a fact. If you have less to say, you will say more. If you really have something to say, you can say it in a very few lines, few words – even a single word may be enough. The less you have to say, the more words you will have to use. The more you have to say, the fewer words you can use.
Now it has become a known fact to psychologists that words are used not to say but to hide. We go on talking because we want to hide something. If you want to hide something you cannot be silent because your face may say it, your silence may indicate it. The other may become suspicious that you are hiding something. So a person who has to hide something will go on talking continuously. Through words you can deceive; through silence you cannot deceive.
The Upanishads really have something to say, so they say it in seed form – in sutras, in aphorisms. This Upanishad has only seventeen sutras. They can be written on a half page. This whole Upanishad can be written on one postcard – on one side! But it has a very potent message, so we will take each seed word and try to penetrate it, to be in a living response with it. Something may begin to vibrate in you, and it can begin, because these words are very potential, they have much. If their atoms could be broken much energy would be released. So be open, receptive, in a deep trust, and let the Upanishad work.

Now we enter into the Atma Pooja Upanishad.
Aum.
Meditation is the constant contemplation of That.
Aum: this word aum is very significant – significant as a sign, as a symbol, as a secret key. So first we must decode it.
Aum has five matras, five steps. The first step is a, the second is u, the third is m. These are gross steps. When we utter aum, a, u, m – these are three words. But utter a-u-m, and in the end the m resounds – mmm. That is a half step – the fourth. Three are gross and can be heard. The fourth is half gross. If you are very aware only then is it heard, otherwise it is lost; and the fifth is just never heard. When the sound of aum vibrates and the vibrations go into the cosmic emptiness, when the sound has gone and a soundlessness remains, that is the fifth. You utter the word aum, then a-u-m is heard very clearly, then a lingering sound of mmm – half a step – and then soundlessness. That is the fifth. These five steps are just signs towards many things.
First: The Upanishads know that human consciousness has five steps. We know the three gross ones – the waking, the dreaming and the sleep. These are three gross – a, u, m. The Upanishads call the fourth turiya. They have not named it because it is not gross. The fourth is that in which one becomes aware of deep sleep also. If you have been deep in sleep, in a deep, dreamless sleep, if in the morning you can say, “I have been in a deep, deep sleep,” then someone in you has been aware and remembers somehow that there has been a very deep, dreamless sleep…but a witness was there. That witness is known as the fourth. But the Upanishads say that even the fourth is not the ultimate because to be a witness is still to be separate. So when the witness also dissolves – if only the existence remains, without a witness – that is the fifth. So this aum is a sign for many things, for many things – for five bodies in man. The Upanishads divide them into anamaya, pranamaya, manomaya, vigyanamaya and anandamaya – five sheaths, five bodies.
This aum is a cosmic sign. This is just a sign, but it is also a symbol. What does it mean when I say it is also a symbol? When someone goes deep into existence, to the roots, to the very roots, then thoughts are no longer there, the thinker is no longer there, objectivity is no longer there, subjectivity is no longer there – but, still, everything is. In that thoughtless, thinker-less moment, a sound is heard. That sound resembles aum – just resembles it. It is not aum; that is why it is a symbol. We cannot reproduce it, this is the approximate resemblance. That is why it has been likened to many sounds, but it is always nearer to aum.
Christians and Mohammedans have represented it as “amen.” That sound which is heard when everything is lost, and only a sound vibrates, resembles aum. It can resemble amen. In English, there are many words – omnipresent, omniscient, omnipotent. That “omn” is the sound. Really, “omniscient” refers to one who has seen the aum, and aum is a symbol for all. “Omnipotent” means one who has become one with aum, because that is the potentiality of the whole cosmos. “Omnipresent” means one who is present in the sound of aum, and that sound surrounds all; it overflows all.
The omn in omniscient, omnipresent, omnipotent, is aum. Amen is aum. Different seekers, different persons, have come with different resemblances, but they always somehow resemble aum. This is a symbol – a symbol of a universal sound. Modern science thinks in terms of electric particles as the foundational units of existence, but the Upanishads think not of electrical particles but of sound particles as the basis.
Science says that sound is a modification of electric vibrations; sound itself is nothing but electricity. The Upanishads say electricity is nothing but sound modifications. One thing is certain – that somehow sound and electricity are convertible. Which is basic? Science says electricity is basic; the Upanishads say sound is basic. I think this difference is simply because of their approaches. The Upanishads reach to the ultimate reality through sound, through mantra. They use sound to reach sound-lessness. By and by, the sound is dropped; by and by, soundlessness is achieved. Ultimately, when they reach to the bottom, they hear a cosmic sound. It is not a thought, it is not a created sound. It is just in the very nature of existence that it sounds.
That sound they have called aum. They say that when we say aum it is just a resemblance – a very far, far-off copy. It is not true, it is not that which is known there, because it is created by us. It is created by us! It is just like a photograph of something; it simply resembles. My photograph simply resembles me; it is not me.

I have heard about the Dutch painter, van Gogh. A sophisticated lady met van Gogh on the street and said, “I have seen a portrait of you, and it was so lovely and so beautiful that I kissed it.”
Van Gogh asked, “Did the portrait reply?”
The lady said, “No. How can the portrait reply?”
So van Gogh said, “Then it was not me….”

A photograph can resemble; it is not real, mm? Nothing is wrong with it, it is enough that it resembles, but one should not mistake it for the real. So aum is just a symbol – a symbol of something it resembles – like a photograph.
Aum is also a secret key. When I say a secret key, I mean because it resembles the ultimate sound. If you can use it and, by and by, go deep with it, you will reach to the ultimate door because it resembles, and it will resemble more if you do certain things with it. For example, if you utter aum then you have to use your lips – your body mechanism is to be used. Then it will resemble less because a very gross mechanism has to be used and it perverts. It changes aum into a gross thing. Do not use your lips. Create the sound of aum in yourself only through your mind, do not use your body. Then it will resemble more, because now you will be using a more subtle medium. It will give a finer photograph, more close to the real.
Do not even use mind: first use the gross body, then drop it. Then use your mind – just create the sound of aum inwardly. Then even stop that and let the sound echo itself. Do not make any effort: it comes. Then it becomes ajapa – then you are not creating it, you are just in the flow of it. Then it goes even deeper and it becomes even more real. You can use it as a key. When it becomes effortless – when it is not with your body, nor with your mind, but when the sound just flows in you – you are very near.
Now only one thing has still to be dropped – the one who is feeling this aum. The “I,” the ego, that feels “Aum is surrounding me.” If you drop this also then there is no barrier and the copy, the photograph, drops into the real, the original. So it is also a secret key.
This aum is miraculous. It is as foundational to mystics as Einstein’s formula of relativity is to physics. That formula is three things: a sign, a symbol and a secret key – and aum is also three things. But basically it is a secret key. Unless you open the doors it is useless to go on thinking about it, futile, wasting time and life and energy. Unless you are ready to open the door, what is the use of talking about the key? Even if you understand all the implications, all the philosophical implications, it is meaningless. So aum is always put in the beginning and it is always put in the end. The Upanishads always begin with aum, they always end with aum. This is the key.
If you enter the house, the first thing to be used is the key; and again, when you come out, the last thing to be used is the key. So enter! Use the key! But if you begin to contemplate on the key and continue sitting at the door, then the key is not a key for you but a barrier. Throw it! ? because it is not opening anything. Rather, it is closing. And you are constantly thinking about the key.
One can go on thinking about the key without using it. There are many who have pondered, thought and contemplated about what aum means. They have created structures, big structures on it, but they have never used the key, they have never entered the palace. It is a symbol, it is a sign, but basically it is a secret key. It can be used as a method to enter into the cosmic, as a method to drop into the oceanic. The subtler it becomes, the deeper, the nearer it goes to the real; the grosser, the less.
Meditation is the constant contemplation of That.
This is the first sutra.
We live in a world of three dimensions. One dimension is I-it – the world of things. I and my house, I and my furniture, I and my wealth: this is the realm of I-it. A world of “it” surrounds me.
Then there is another dimension, I-thou: I and my beloved, I and my friend, I and my family – a world of persons. This is the second realm.
Then there is a third realm, I-That: I and the universe. The Upanishad says: Meditation is the constant contemplation of That – neither of it, nor of thou, but of That. “That” means the whole. It is not a thing, not a person, it is a That. But why use That? Whenever we say “That,” it means something that transcends, something that is beyond, something that is not where we are – neither in our relationships with things nor in our relationships with persons…. That, without any name, because if you give it a name – for example, if you call it God – it becomes an I-thou relationship. If you call it father or mother, then you bring it to the second dimension. If you say there is no God, then you have to live in a one-dimensional world, I-it.
That is not a thing. Theists are ready to say it is not a thing, but they say it is a person. The Upanishads are not even ready to call it a person, because to make it a person is to limit it and to make it a person is to make it finite. They simply use the word that. They say, “It is all, but we cannot name it because it has no form, no limitation. It is the allness.” So what to call it? They do not call it God, they do not call it divine, they do not call it lord – they do not call it by any name. No form, no name, they simply use the word That, and continuous contemplation of That is meditation.
If you can remember That continuously, then you are in meditation. When you are with things, remember That. When you are with persons, remember That. Wherever you are, remember That – the all. Never see the limited as limited: always look deep and feel the unlimited. Never see the form as the form: always look deep and see the formless in it. Never see the thing as the thing: go deep, feel it, and the That will be revealed. Never see any person caged in his personality. Penetrate deep and feel That which goes beyond – the within beyond.
The continuous contemplation of That is meditation – no ritual, no method, no technique, simply continuous contemplation. But it is arduous, because one has to remember continuously with no gap, no discontinuity, not even a single moment’s forgetfulness. Remembrance – continuous, constant, without any gap. It is the most arduous thing to remember continuously. We cannot remember continuously even for a few seconds. Just begin to count your breaths, and remember how many breaths you can count while continuously remembering, constantly remembering the process of breathing – the incoming, the outgoing breaths. Remember, and count. You have counted three or four, and then you miss. Something else comes in and you have forgotten. And then you remember, “Oh, I was counting, and I have counted only three and I missed.”
Remembrance is the most difficult thing, because we are asleep. We are deeply asleep. We are walking in sleep, talking in sleep, moving, living, loving, doing everything in sleep, in a deep somnambulism, a deep, natural hypnosis. That is why there is so much confusion and so much conflict, so much violence and so much war. It is really a miracle how the human race has survived – so much sleep, and still we manage somehow!
But we are asleep. Our behavior is not a behavior which can be called alert, attentive, aware – we are not. For a single minute we cannot be aware of ourselves. Try it, and then you will feel how much asleep you are: “If I cannot remember myself continuously for one minute, for sixty seconds, how deeply asleep I must be! Two or three seconds, and then sleep comes and I am not there, I have moved. The consciousness has been dropped, the unconscious has come in. There is a deep darkness, and again I remember that I was trying to be aware.”

P. D. Ouspensky was working with Gurdjieff on his method of self-remembering. The first time he met Gurdjieff he said, “What do you mean by self-remembering? I remember myself: I am P. D. Ouspensky.”
Gurdjieff said, “Close your eyes and remember that you are P. D. Ouspensky, and when you forget, tell me. Be frank.”
Only three or four seconds passed and Ouspensky opened his eyes and he said, “I began to dream. I forgot that I am P. D. Ouspensky. I tried three or four times. I said within myself, ‘I am P. D. Ouspensky, I am P. D. Ouspensky, I am P. D. Ouspensky,’ and then a dream broke in and I was not aware.”
So Gurdjieff said, “This is not self-remembering – that you are P. D. Ouspensky. Firstly, you are not P. D. Ouspensky, and secondly, this is not remembering. When the remembering comes you will be the first to deny that you are P. D. Ouspensky.”
For three months Ouspensky tried hard, very hard. The more you try, the more you become aware how hard it is. The more you try, the more you begin to feel that “I have been asleep all my life.” This is just a mechanical awareness that we have. We can move with it, do the routine, but can never go deep. For three months, when he tried and tried and tried and then became aware, a new pillar of consciousness came into existence. When he could feel and be aware constantly, then Gurdjieff asked him to come with him and to move on the street. So Ouspensky said, “For the first time, on the street of a big city, I became aware that everyone is asleep, everyone is moving in sleep. I had moved in the same street but was never aware, and I saw every man asleep – just with open eyes.” He became so afraid that he said to his teacher, “I cannot go further; I must go back. Everyone is so asleep that anything can happen here. I cannot move.”

Just sit by the side of the street and look at people’s eyes moving, then you will become aware that everyone is closed within himself. He is not aware of what is happening around him. Someone is talking with himself, someone is moving his hands, making gestures; he may be in some dream. Lips are moving, everyone is talking within; no one is aware of what is happening around him. All are moving just automaton-like. They are going to their homes; they need not even remember where their homes are – they just move automatically. Their legs move, their hands move their car wheels, they reach their homes, but this whole process is just a sleep, a mechanical routine. Tracks are there, and on those tracks they go on moving. That is why we are always afraid of the new – because then we have to create new tracks. We are afraid of the new because for the new the routine will not do and for some time we will have to be a bit alert. We are always fixed in our dead routines and are, in a way, dead. A sleeping person is really dead. He cannot be said to be alive.
Only for moments, for a few moments in the whole life, do we become aware, and those moments are either in deep moments of love, which are rare…. It happens only to a few people, to very few. When it happens everyone else will feel “That man has gone mad” because he becomes so different, because he comes to see things in a different color, with a different music, with a different light. He begins to look around and he sees a different world. Of course for us he has gone mad, so we can forgive him because “He is mad. He is in a dream.” Really, the contrary is the case: we are asleep, and for a moment he has become aware of a deeper reality. He is alone, but that awareness cannot continue because it is just an accidental happening.
It is not by his effort that he has attained it. It has just happened. It is an accident. He will go to sleep again, and when he goes to sleep then he will feel that he has been betrayed by his lover or beloved because that magic is no longer there. That magic came because he became aware of a different world – in this world there are different worlds. He became aware and now he is asleep again, so he feels he has been betrayed. Every lover feels that he has been betrayed. No one has betrayed him, only in a sudden awakening he has seen a different world, with a different beauty, with different sounds, and now he is again asleep. That glimpse is lost and he feels he has been betrayed. No one has betrayed him, it is only that suddenly he became aware.
One becomes aware either with love or with death. If you are suddenly in the grip of death you will be aware. In sudden accidents – the car speeding uncontrollably down the hill – you will become aware, because there is no future and the past has ended. Only the present moment – this moment of dropping down the hill – is all. Now a different dimension of time opens. You are here and now for the first time. Dreams are not possible because there is no future. You cannot think about the future; the past is just ending. Between these two, for this moment, in this calamity, you have become aware. So love and death are the only moments when we become aware, but they are not in our hands. They are not.
So when the Upanishad says: …the constant contemplation of That, it means that if you can remember continuously, constantly in everything, in every event, that whatsoever is, is That – inside, outside, if everything becomes just a symbol for the remembrance of That – then the consciousness will explode, the sleep will not be there, you will become conscious and aware. That consciousness, that awareness, is meditation.
There are two more things. “Continuous” means without any gap – not a single moment’s gap. But this is difficult, because then your life will be impossible. If you go on continuously remembering the divine how can you live, how can you move, how can you eat? That problem arises if you begin to remember his name, if you begin to remember Rama, Jesus, or something else. If you begin to remember his name, if you give some name to him and begin to repeat “Rama-Rama-Rama,” then your life will become impossible, because either you can remember Rama or you can move on the street.

A soldier was brought to me, a very sincere man, a very devoted one. He was trying continuously to remember Rama. Someone, some guru, told him to remember Rama continuously. He became so much absorbed with that repetition that outward life became impossible – impossible! He could not sleep because he had to remember Rama. If you are repeating “Rama-Rama-Rama” inside you cannot go to sleep, this constant activity will not allow it. He could not move on the street because someone may be honking a horn and he could not hear. He was surrounded by his own repetition, closed. He became insensitive. He was a military soldier, so his captain brought him to me and said, “He cannot even listen. I say, ‘Left turn!’ and he is standing and he is looking. He is absent. What is he doing?”
The captain told me, “It has become impossible. This man has to be hospitalized.”
I asked the soldier, “What are you doing?”
He said, “I can tell you but not my captain. My guru has given me a mantra to repeat continuously, so I am repeating ‘Rama-Rama-Rama.’ Now the repetition has gone so deep – for three years I have been repeating continuously – that I have lost sleep. I cannot see what is happening, I cannot hear what is happening around me. A great barrier has come between myself and the world. I am enclosed within my repetition of ‘Rama.’” He asked me, “How can I do both? If I have to repeat it continuously then I cannot do anything else. So tell me what to do. If I do anything else then this repetition breaks. Gaps are bound to come there.”

This is not meant here. That is why the Upanishad is not giving any name, any form, but is simply saying That. It is possible to remember That continuously, because you are not to remember his name. Rather, you have to feel That in everything you are doing…just carrying water from the well….

One Zen monk, Bokuju, was asked, “What do you do continuously?”
He said, “I don’t do anything continuously. Whatsoever I am doing, I am doing it totally. When I am carrying water from the well, I am carrying water from the well. When I am chopping wood, I am chopping wood. When I am sleeping, I am sleeping.”
The questioner asked, “Then what are you doing?”
Bokuju said, “I am not doing anything. When I am chopping wood, the divine is chopping wood. When I am carrying the water, he is carrying the water. He is the water which is being carried, and he is the wood which is being chopped. Now he is and I am not! So everything has become a worship and everything has become a meditation.”

This whole Upanishad is concerned with how to make your whole life a worship. This Upanishad is absolutely anti-ritualistic. No ritual is needed, only a different attitude, a remembering of That – doing, nondoing, but remembering That. When I say “remembering That” it is not a mental remembering. You are not to remember, “Okay, this stone is That.” If you have to remember in this way, that “this stone is That,” then it is not remembering because two still exist – this stone and That. When the Upanishad says, …constant contemplation of That, it means the stone must drop. Only That is. That is a deep realization, a constant realization.
Begin to feel. Do not touch a thing without feeling the That; do not love anyone without feeling That; do not move, do not even breathe without feeling That. It is not that you have to impose That on everything, you have to discover That in everything, mm? The distinction must be clear. You are not to impose That on everything. You can impose; that will be just a trick. You have to discover. Seeing a flower, you can impose and can say, “Oh, that flower is That.”
No, do not impose, do not say anything. Just remain silent near the flower. Look at it; be in deep sympathy with it, in a deep communion with it. Forget yourself. Just be a passive awareness there, and the flower will flower into That. The That will be revealed.
So go on discovering That. That is what is meant by constant contemplation. And constant contemplation of That is meditation.

============================================================

Osho,
You said last night that those who have become void, valley-like,
do not react but they respond, and that the responses of these
different enlightened ones will be different – that the valley will
re-echo in its own unique and individual way.
Now a question arises whether those who become absolutely void,
nothingness, still have a personality and individuality.
If so, then please explain how this becomes possible.
This is one of the paradoxes of spiritual life: the more one dissolves into the divine, the more unique one becomes. The dissolution is not of the individuality but of the self: the dissolution is not of the uniqueness but of the ego. The more you are an ego, the more you are like others, because everyone is an egoist.
The ego is the most ordinary thing in the world. Everyone is an egoist; even a newborn child is an egoist – a perfect egoist. So it is not anyone’s achievement; it is not extra-ordinary. Really, it can be said that to be just ordinary is the most extraordinary thing possible – because no one feels just ordinary. So to feel oneself extraordinary is just the most ordinary thing. Everyone feels like that. So ego is not something unique.
If you have an ego, it is not something unique. Really, egolessness is the most unique thing, the most uncommon, rare. It happens only sometimes. Centuries pass, and rarely the event happens that someone becomes egoless – a Buddha, a Jesus. But when we say that someone becomes egoless, it does not mean that he is not. Really, for the first time, now he is – authentically grounded into the very being. He is no longer an ego.
So take it from a different root: ego is a false phenomenon – just an appearance, not a reality. It is not something grounded in the being – just a dream, a thought, just a mental construction. So the more you belong to the ego, the less you belong to the existence. The more you concentrate on your ego, the less and less you are authentic. You become false – an existential lie.
When we talk about becoming empty, nothing, valley-like, we mean that there is no ego – but you are! Let me say it in this way: I say “I am,” but when the ego dissolves there remains the pure “am-ness.” The “I” is no longer there, but “am-ness” is there, and for the first time pure, total, uncontaminated. The ego contaminates it.
The word personality and the word individuality must not be confused, they are totally different. They do not mean any similar entity; they are not the same at all. Personality belongs to the ego, individuality to the being. Personality is just a facade. The ego is the center and the personality is the circumference. It is not individuality at all.
This word personality is very meaningful. It is derived from the Greek word persona. “Persona” means a mask. In Greek drama, the characters, the actors, will use masks to hide their faces so the real face is hidden and the masked face becomes the reality. “Personality” means a mask – that which you are not but only appear to be.
So we have many faces; really, no one has one personality, mm? – we have multi-personalities. Everyone has to change faces the whole day. You cannot remain with one face. It will be so difficult because every time you face someone else you have to use another face. Before your servant you cannot have the same face as you have before your master. Before your wife you cannot have the same face as you have before your beloved. So we have a flexible system of continually changing faces.
For the whole day, the whole life, we are continually changing faces. You can be aware of this. You can feel when you change a face and why you change it and how many faces you have. So, really, a personality means a system of flexible faces, and when you say that someone has a great personality it only means that he has a more flexible system. He is not a fixed man: he has a more flexible system. He can change very easily. He is a big actor.
This is personality; you have to construct it every moment. So no one can be at ease with his personality, it is a constant effort. So if you are tired, your personality will lose its luster. In the morning your personality has a luster, in the evening it is lost. The whole day of utility: it is constantly changing. So when I use the word personality, I mean a false appearance which you have created around yourself.
Individuality is something else. Individuality does not mean something constructed and created by you, but the very nature of your being. Again, the word individuality is very meaningful. It means that which cannot be divided, which is indivisible. We have an inherent intrinsic nature which cannot be divided, which is indivisible. Carl Gustav Jung chooses the word ‘individuation’ as one of the deepest phenomena. He said individuation is the way towards truth, towards the divine – individuation: being an individual.
The Indian term “yoga” means the same thing as individuation. The term “yoga” means to conjoin again that which has become divisible, to join again that which has become divided, to come again to the indivisible. So when translating “yoga” into English, it would be better if we call it “the way to individuation.” This individuality remains and becomes more penetrating, becomes more sharp. The moment you lose the ego, the moment you discard your personalities, you become individual.
This individuality is a unique phenomenon. This is unrepeatable. A Buddha cannot be repeated; a Gautam Siddharth can be repeated. A Jesus can be repeated, but not Jesus Christ. Jesus means the personality; Jesus Christ means the individuality. Gautam Siddharth is just ordinary; he can be repeated. Anyone can be Gautam Siddharth, but the moment Gautam Siddharth becomes enlightened and becomes the Buddha, now the phenomenon is unrepeatable. It is unique. It has never been before and it will never be again. This buddhahood, this peak of realization, is so unique that it cannot be repeated.
So when I said to be just like a valley, and when I said that every valley will echo differently, I meant that every valley has its own individuality. Buddha has his own, Jesus his, Krishna his. So, really, this will be good to understand.
Why do Krishna, Christ and Buddha differ so much? They differ! They differ as much as there is any possibility to differ, but still they are, in a very deep way, one. As far as individuation is concerned they are one; as far as individualities are concerned they are different. They have come to “the undivided.” They have realized the undivided, the basic unity of existence, but because of this basic unity and its realization, it does not mean that now they are not unique. Now they are really unique. That’s why I say this is one of the paradoxes.
Two ordinary persons can differ, but their difference can never be total, absolute – never! Even in their difference they have similarities. Really, their difference is always of degrees. Even if they are totally contrary to one another, their difference is of degrees. A person who is a communist and a person who is anti-communist – even they are different only in degrees. The person who is anti-communist is still communist to a lesser degree, and the person who is a communist is still a capitalist to a lesser degree. The difference is always of degrees. And they can change, they can change camps very easily; there is no problem. Ordinarily, they change. The difference is just like that of cold and heat – only of degrees. But a Buddha and Krishna, a Christ and Mohammed, and a Lao Tzu and Mahavira – their difference is not of degrees. They can never meet. This is the paradox: they have come to oneness, and yet they can never meet. The difference is not of degrees. The difference is of their uniqueness. What do I mean by this uniqueness?
We can conceive of “oneness” very easily. A drop of water drops into the ocean and becomes one with it. But that oneness is just dead – a dead oneness. The drop lost itself completely; now it is nowhere. A Buddha is not dropping in that way. His dropping is in a different way. If you put a flame before the sun the flame becomes one with the sun, but the individuality is not lost, it still remains itself. If we burn fifty flames in this room they will create one light, but every flame will be a flame unique in itself. So this dissolution into the cosmic is not a simple dissolution. It is very complex. The complexity is this: the one who dissolves, remains. Rather, on the contrary, for the first time he is.
This individuality echoes differently, and that is the beauty of it. It is beautiful! Otherwise it will be just ugly: just think, if Buddha responds in the same way as Jesus, the world will be poorer for it, very poor. A Buddha responds in his own way, a Jesus in his own way. The world is richer for it and there is beauty. The world is freer and you can be yourself.
But this distinction must be remembered: when I say that you can be yourself, I do not mean your ego. When I say you can be yourself, I mean your nature, your Tao, your existence. But it has an individuality. That individuality is not personality. So if I say they belong to the same existence, yet individually; they respond from the same depth, but individually; no sense of ego is there – but the uniqueness remains.
This world is not just a colorless unity; it is not monotonous. It has multi-colors; it is multi-tonal. You can create music with one note also, but then it will be just monotonous and boring. It cannot be lively, it cannot be beautiful. A more subtle and complex harmony is achieved through many notes – multi-phonal. A harmony runs through, but it is not a monotonous thing and each note has its own individuality. It contributes to the total harmony, and it contributes only because it has its own individuality.
A Buddha contributes only because he is a Buddha, and a Jesus contributes only because he is a Jesus. He gives a new note, a new vibration. A new harmony is born because of him, but that is possible only because he has an individuality. This is not only for deeper things. Even for very trivial and small things a Buddha and a Jesus differ. A Buddha walks in his own way; no one else can walk like that. A Jesus looks in his own way; no one else can look like that. Even their eyes, the very gestures, the very words they use, are unique. The other cannot even conceive….
This world is a harmony of unique notes, and the music is richer for that – every valley echoing in its own way.
All those well-wishers who try to impose a dead unity and who try to wash out individuality from everywhere – who say that the Koran means the same thing as the Gita, who say that Buddha teaches the same thing as Mahavira – are not really aware of what nonsense they are talking. If they could win, the world would become just a poor world. How can the Koran say the same thing as the Gita? How can the Gita say the same thing as the Koran? The Koran has its own individuality – no Gita can say that. No Koran can repeat the Gita because Krishna has his own aura, Mohammed his own. They never meet. Yet, I say, they stand on the same ground. They never meet, this is the beauty – and they will never meet. They will be just like parallel lines running to infinity.
They will never meet! This is what I mean by uniqueness: they are like peaks. The higher the peak goes, the less is the possibility of meeting with another peak. You can meet when you are on the ground – everything is meeting – but the higher you go, the more of a peak you become, and the less is the possibility of any meeting. So they are like Himalayan peaks, never meeting. If you try to impose a false unity over them, you will just destroy the peaks.
They are different, but their difference need not be inimical, their difference need not be a conflict. The conflict arises only because we are not ready to accept differences. Then we try to find similarities. Either we must have similarities or we will have conflict. Either we must speak the same thing or we must be enemies. We have only two alternatives – and both are wrong. They belong to one attitude. Why should they not be different? – altogether different, meeting nowhere? What is the need of conflict? Really, different notes create a beautiful harmony. Then there is a deeper meeting – no meeting in the notes, but in what the notes create; in the harmony there is a meeting.
One must begin to feel that harmony. If one only knows a jarring note – a Mohammed, a Jesus, a Buddha are just notes – no harmony is felt.
The universe is a harmony. If you can begin to feel the gaps and the underlying unity and the soaring peaks meeting nowhere, and if you can see this whole in a totality, in a comprehensive unity, then you accept both – the individuality and the common harmony. Then there is no problem. There is not!

Osho,
Can this also explain why Mahavira and Buddha,
who were contemporaries, never met –
never physically came across one another?
They cannot meet – even physically. They came, so many times, very near meeting. Once they were both staying in one sarai – an inn. In one part was Mahavira and in another part Buddha – but there was no meeting. They passed through the same villages. Their whole lives they were confined to Bihar, a very small area. They visited the same villages; they remained in the same villages; they talked to the same audiences. Their followers went on coming from Buddha to Mahavira and from Mahavira to Buddha. There was much controversy, there was much conversion, but they never met.
They cannot meet! Their very beings are now such peaks that the meeting is not possible. The meeting has become intrinsically impossible. Even if they just sit side by side they can never meet. Even if to us they appear to be meeting and embracing each other, they can never meet. Their meeting has become impossible. They are so unique, they are so peak-like, the inner meeting is impossible. What is the use of meeting outwardly? It is useless, it is meaningless.
This seems inconceivable to us. We think that two good persons should meet. For us, the non-meeting attitude is something bad. But really, there is no non-meeting attitude – there is impossibility. It is not that Buddha would not like to meet Mahavira. It is not that Mahavira is resistant. No, it is simply impossible; it just cannot happen. There is no attitude about it. So, really, this is miraculous. They remained in one village, they stayed in one sarai, but never, neither in Buddhist literature nor in Jaina scriptures, is there any reference to anyone suggesting that they should meet – not a single reference. There is not even any reference that it had been suggested it would have been better if they had met. This is miraculous, surprising. Neither has denied the other. Neither Buddha nor Mahavira has said, “I will not meet.” Why didn’t they meet? It is a sheer impossibility. It is not possible.
For us who stand on the ground it looks strange, but if you stand on the peak then it will not look strange. Why not ask a Himalayan peak to meet another? They are so near – so near! Why can’t they meet? Their very being, their very peak-hood, creates the impossibility. So it is not a question of why they never met – they cannot, they will never. The very door is closed. Yet I say they are one: howsoever one peak may differ from another, in their very roots they are one. They may both belong to the same part of earth, but only in the roots are they one.
There is another point to be pondered over: because they are so much one in the roots, there is not even any necessity to meet. Only those who are not one in the ground will try to meet, because basically they know there is no meeting.
Many people have asked me why I have not tried a great synthesis of all the religions. Gandhi has tried; many others – Theosophists have tried. They have tried for a great synthesis of all the religions. I say that, if you try, you show that you know there is no synthesis. The effort shows that you feel that somewhere religions are divided. I do not feel this at all. In the roots they are one, and in the peaks they are divided and they must be divided. Every peak has its own beauty – why destroy it? Why try to create a false thing which is not there? A peak must be a peak – an individual. In the earth they are one.
So the Koran must remain purely the Koran. Nothing should be imposed, infiltrated from the Gita or the Ramayana or anything else. No interpolation, no mixing. The Koran must remain in its purity the Koran. It is a peak – a beautiful peak. Why destroy it? This is possible only if you are aware of a deeper unity in the ground, in the roots.
Religions are one in their roots, but never in their expression – and they should not be. So as the world progresses more, as human consciousness becomes more conscious, more integrated, there will be more religions. Not less – more. Ultimately, if every human being becomes a peak, there will be as many religions as there are human beings. Why should anyone follow Mohammed if he himself can become a peak? Why should he follow Krishna if he himself can become a peak?
This is unfortunate – that one has to follow anybody. This is just a necessary evil. If you cannot become a peak, only then do you have to follow, but follow in such a way that the sooner you can become a peak the better. We can have a beautiful world, a greater world with a greater humanity, with everyone as a unique peak. But that peak can come only through individuation, through dissolving the ego and the false personality and remaining centered in your nature, in your pure being. Then you become like a valley, and then there are echoes.

Osho,
Yesterday you explained about three types of listening: first, listening though the intellect; second, through emotion, sympathy and love;
and third, through the whole being, through faith.
Considering the first two types of listening, how does one arrive at the third type of listening – that is, through the whole being, through faith?
And are the intellect and emotions included and involved in the third type of listening?
Intellectual listening means that when you are listening you are simultaneously arguing with it. A constant argument is going on. I am saying something to you, you are listening, and constantly there is an argument inside whether this is right or wrong. You are comparing with your own concepts, your own ideology, your own system. So constantly, when you are listening to me, you are comparing whether I confirm your ideas or not, whether I am according to you or not; whether you can concede to me or not, whether I am convincing or not. How is listening possible in this way? You are too full of yourself, so it is miraculous that within this constant inner turmoil you are capable of listening to something. Even then, whatsoever you have heard will not be what I have said. It cannot be – because when the mind is full with its own ideas it goes on giving colors to everything that comes to it. It hears not what is being said, but what it wants to hear. It chooses, it drops, it interprets, and only then does something penetrate – but that has a completely different shape. So this is what is meant by intellectual listening.
If you want to go deeply into understanding what is being said, this inner turmoil must stop. It must cease. It must not continue. Otherwise you are in your own way, and constantly destroying the very possibility of something which can happen to you. You can miss; and everyone is missing much.
We live enclosed in our own minds, and we carry that enclosure with us everywhere. So whatsoever we see, whatsoever we hear, whatsoever happens around us, it is never transmitted to the inner consciousness directly. The mind remains in between, always playing tricks. One must be aware that this is happening. This is the first thing, in order to go deep.
This is the first thing for the second stage of listening – to be aware of what your mind is doing to you. It is coming in between. Wherever you move, it moves before you. It is not like a shadow which follows; you have become a shadow to it. It goes, and you have to move. It moves before you and colors everything. So you are never in contact with the facticity of anything. The mind creates a fiction.
You must be aware of this phenomenon of what the mind is doing. But you are not – because we are identified with the mind, we never think that the mind is doing something. When I say something and it does not tally with your thought, it is not that you will think that your mind is not tallying with the thought. You will think, “No, I am not convinced.” You do not have a gap between you and your mind. You are identified – and that is really the problem. That is how the mind can play tricks with you.
You are identified with a thought or with a thought process. This is strange because, only two days before, this thought was not yours, you heard it somewhere; now you have absorbed it and it has become your own. Now this thought will say, “No – this is not right, because this is not according to me.” You will not feel the difference that this is mind speaking, memory speaking, the mechanism speaking. You will not feel that “I must remain aloof.”
Even if you have to compare, even if you have to judge, you must remain aloof – aloof from your memory, from your mind, from your past. But there is a subtle identification: “My mind is me.” So you say, “I am a Communist” or “I am a Catholic” or “I am a Hindu.” You never say, “My mind has been brought up in such a way that my mind is Hindu.” This is the fact: you are not Hindu. How can you be a Hindu? It is only the mind. If you are the Hindu, then there is no possibility of any transformation.
The mind can be changed, and you must remain capable of changing it. If you become identified with it then you lose your freedom. The greatest freedom is to be free of one’s own mind. The greatest, I say – to be free from one’s own mind – because it is a subtle bondage, so deep that you never feel it as a bondage The very prison becomes your home.
Be constantly aware that your mind is not your consciousness, and the more you are aware, the more you will feel that consciousness is something totally different. Consciousness is the energy, mind is just the thought content. Be the master of it. Don’t allow it to be the master; don’t allow it to just go ahead of you everywhere. Let it follow you, use it, but don’t be used by it. It is an instrument, but we are identified with this instrument, mm? So break the identification. Remember that you are not the mind.
Really, so-called religious persons always remember: “We are not the body.” They never remember: “We are not the mind.” And body is not a bondage at all. Mind is the bondage. Your body is not a bondage at all, your mind is. Really, your body comes from nature, from the divine, and your mind from the society. So body has a beauty, but never the mind. Mind is always ugly. It is a cultivated thing, a false construct. The body has a very beautiful realm. If you can drop the mind, then you will not feel any conflict at all with the body. The body becomes just a door to the greater, to the infinite expanse. There is nothing ugly in the body – mm? – it is a natural flowering, but the so-called religious people are always against the body and always for the mind. They have created such a nuisance. They have created such confusion. They have destroyed all sensitivity, because body is the source of all sensitivity. If once you begin to be against your body you will become insensate.
The mind is just an accumulation of past knowledge, information, experiences. It is just a computer. We are identified with it. One is a Christian, one is a Hindu, one is a communist, one is a Catholic, one is this and that, but one is never oneself…always identified somewhere with something. Remember this: be aware, and create a distance between you and your mind. Never create any distance between you and your body. Create a distance between you and your mind – you will be more alive and more childlike and more innocent and more aware.
So the first thing is to create a distance: that is, not to identify. Remember you are not the mind, then the first listening will change into the second.
The second is emotional – deeply felt, sympathetic. It is a love attitude. You are hearing some music or seeing a dance, so you don’t just remember the intellect, you begin to participate. When you are seeing a dance, your feet begin to participate. When you are listening to music, your hands begin to be participants; you begin to be part of it. This is a sympathetic way of listening, deeper than intellect. That’s why, whenever you can listen with your heart and feeling you feel elated, you feel transported to somewhere else. Then you are not in this world. Really, you are in this world, but you feel that you are not in this world. Why? Because you are not in the world of the intellect. A different realm opens – you begin to be actively in it.
Intellect is always an onlooker standing out – never in. So the more intellect grows in the world, the more we become just passive observers, in everything. You will not dance, but you will watch others dancing. If this goes on as it is going on, day by day, soon you will not be doing anything, you will just be looking at others doing. This will be possible some day: you will not love – it has become possible, it is there now – you will just watch others loving. What are you watching in a film? – others loving. You are just an onlooker – a dead, passive, onlooker. You are watching others playing. You are watching others singing, others dancing.
Somewhere one of Camus’ characters says, “Love is not for me. My servants will do it for me” – love! A really rich man – even love has to be done by his servants. Why should he do it? The logic is the same. If servants can play music for you, if servants can do prayer for you, why not love? A servant is doing worship for you in the temple, so why not love? If a servant can be used in between you and the divine, why not between you and your lover or beloved? What is wrong in it? The logic is the same, really. Soon those who are rich will not do their loving themselves because servants can do it. Only poor ones will do their own loving and will feel very miserable because of it. Everything can be deputed. You can be just an onlooker, because intellect is basically an onlooker, never a participant. If we create a world around intellect then it is going to happen.
The second center is more involved; you begin to participate. I say you will understand more if you begin to participate, because the moment you are sympathetic your mind is open, more open than when you are in a constant fight. It is open, receptive, inviting.
This is how one can listen through feeling, but still there is a depth even deeper than feeling, and that depth I call total listening, with your full being – because feeling is again a part. Intellect is a part, feeling is a part, the source of action is another. There are many parts in your existence, in your being. You can listen with feeling better than with intellect, but still it is only a part. When you are listening with your feeling the intellect will just go to sleep; otherwise it will disturb. It will just go to sleep.
The third is to listen totally – not even participating with it, but being one with it. One way is to watch dance through intellect, another is to feel dance and begin to participate in it. Sitting in your seat, the dancer is dancing. You begin to participate; you begin to keep the beat. The third is becoming the dance oneself – not the dancer, but the dance. The total being is involved. You are not even out to feel it: you are it!
So remember that the deepest knowledge is possible only when you become one with something. This is “by faith.”
How to come to it? Be aware of your intellect; be unidentified with the mind. Then come to the second – feeling. Then be aware that feeling is just a part and your whole being is just lying dead. The whole is not there, so bring the whole into it. When you bring the whole in, it is not that the intellect is denied or feeling is denied, they are in it, but now in a different harmony. Nothing is negated. Everything is there, but now in a different pattern. The whole being is participating, is in it – has become it.
So when you listen, just listen as if you have become the listening. When I am saying something, let it go into you not with a fight, not with a sympathy, but with a totality. Be it! Let it go. Vibrate – with no resistance, with no feeling, but with totality. Experiment with it, and you will begin to experience a new dimension of listening. That goes not only for listening, it is for everything. You can eat that way, you can walk that way, you can sleep that way – you can live that way.

Kabir sends his son, Kamaal, to the field one day. Kabir’s cows have no food that day, so he sends Kamaal to cut some grass from the field. Kamaal goes, and has not yet returned. The afternoon has come and the evening has come, and Kabir is just waiting and the cows are hungry. Where has Kamaal gone? So Kabir goes to find out.
Kamaal is standing in a grass-field. The sun is setting, the wind is blowing, the grass is moving like waves, and Kamaal is standing there moving wave-like, just with the grass. The whole day has passed like that, and Kabir comes and says, “Have you gone mad, Kamaal? What are you doing?”
Suddenly Kamaal is brought back to a different world and he says, “Oh, I had forgotten that I am Kamaal; I became just grass. I was not. I became just grass. I moved with it, I danced with it, and I forgot what I had come here for. Now tell me, what had I come for?”
Kabir says, “To cut the grass!”
So Kamaal laughs and says, “How can one cut oneself? Today it is not possible. I will come again and try, but I cannot promise because I have known a different realm. A different world has opened before me.”
Kabir, on this day, named him Kamaal. Kamaal means “a miracle.”

This is the miracle. If you can be totally in anything the miracle happens, and this is not only for listening, it is for everything. Be total! Move totally. Don’t divide yourself. Never divide yourself. Any division is just wasting your energy, any division is just suicidal. Don’t divide! If you love, love totally – don’t withhold. If you listen, listen totally – don’t withhold anything. Just move totally.
Only this total movement can bring you to a realization where ego cannot be found. It can be found with intellect, it can be found with feeling, but never with your total being. It can be found with intellect, because intellect has no center of its own. It will not allow the center of the total to come into operation, so the intellect has to create its own center – it becomes the ego. Feeling will not allow the total, so feeling has its own center – it becomes the ego.
That’s why men and women have different types of egos, because man’s ego is intellect-centered and woman’s ego is feeling-centered. They have different qualities of ego. That’s why a man can never understand a woman, a woman never understands a man. They have different types of centers and different languages.
When intellect says yes, it means yes. When emotion says yes, it does not necessarily mean yes. When emotion says no, it may mean yes; it may just be an invitation to be persuaded more. If you take a woman at her word you will be in difficulty, because her word is not an intellectual assertion. It has a different way of movement, a different quality. Intellect has a direct, mathematical ego. You can understand it easily. So to understand a man is not very difficult because the logic is straight: two and two make four. To understand a woman is different because the logic is not straight, it moves in circles, so two and two never make four. They can make anything, but never four – the logic moves in a circle. Emotion moves in a circle; logic and intellect move in a straight line.
When something moves in a circle, you can never be certain because it may mean just the contrary. Soon it will move in a circle, and it will be the opposite of its own assertion. So with a woman one has to be aware not of what she has said but of what she means. The actual assertion is not to be given much importance, but what she means, and the meaning may be something very different.
So it has always happened that very intellectual persons have never been at ease with their wives – never. Socrates, a very intelligent person, an intellectual genius, knew every nook and corner of logic, but was never at ease with his wife, Xanthippe – never. He could not understand what she was saying. That is, he understood what she was saying, but he never understood what she meant. He was so logical that he always missed the point. He went direct, straight, and she went in circles.
Intellect has its own ego – direct, straight. Emotion has its own ego – circular. They both have egos. The totality has no ego. The totality has individuality. So when you reach totality, you are neither man nor woman. You are both and you are neither. You transcend and comprehend both. That is what is meant by ardhanarishwar – half-man, half-woman: a deep communion inside happens. You have become total, one, with no division.
One thing you must note: this is not a fixed arrangement. When I say that a man has an intellectual ego, it is not a fixed arrangement. In some moments he may just regress to an emotional ego; in some moments a woman may come up to an intellectual ego. Then things are more confused. When a man is in difficulty, he will just regress to an emotional ego. He will begin to weep and begin to talk in ways which are not even comprehensible to him, and later on he will say, “I cannot say what happens. In spite of myself I begin to weep, I begin to act in ways in which I would not like to act.” A very strong man, in a particular situation, may begin to behave in a very emotional way. A very emotional woman, in a particular situation, may begin to behave very “man-like.” In a different setting the ego may change from one center to another. That creates even more difficulties – but one has to be aware.
With feeling or with intellect, the ego is bound to be there. Only with totality is there no ego. So this I give you as a criterion: If you are, and you don’t feel any “I,” you are total. You are sitting here: listen as if there is no “I” in you. Ears are there, a listening process is there, your consciousness is there, but no “I”; then you are total. How can you be divided without an “I”? Without an ego, how can you be divided? The ego is the division.
Just as I said that there are many personalities, there are also many egos. Each center has its own ego. Intellect has its own, emotion has its own, the sex center has its own ego, its own “I.” If you go deep down into the bio-structure of the body, each cell has its own ego. That is the division. If you are without an ego, if you just are, with no “I”-feeling anywhere, then you are total. In that totalness – even if for a single moment you are total – you will be suddenly awakened. Then anything can awaken you – anything.

A Zen nun is carrying an earthen water-pot from the well. For thirty years she has been in this monastery – working continuously, meditating, making every effort to achieve a tranquillity, a state of stillness where the truth can reflect, but it has not come.
Suddenly the water-pot falls and is broken, shattered. She stands there, sees it shatter, and the water flows out – and she is awakened. Suddenly she achieves the enlightenment. She runs, she dances, goes into the temple. Her master comes and touches her feet and says, “Now you are a buddha, you have achieved.”
But the nun asks, “Tell me, how did this happen? – because I tried and tried and tried continuously for thirty years and it was not happening. This morning I decided that this seems just absurd and it will not come, so I left every effort. So why, this day, has this happened?”
The master says, “Because for the first time you were total and without an ego. Effort creates an ego. The very effort was the barrier. Now, without any effort, without any motive, without any ambition, you were just carrying a water-pot and suddenly the pot falls – bang! The pot has fallen and broken and suddenly you become aware, with no ego. The very listening, the very breaking of the pot, the shattering, the noise, the flowing of the water and you there without any ego, listening totally – the thing has happened.”

So when I say listen totally, I mean this.

Osho,
What are the characteristics and indications that show whether one has reached the authentic and real, cosmic sound aum?
It is a difficult question – difficult because the happening is always inside, in a way private, and you cannot know of it or about it from the outside. You can never decide from the outside whether someone has achieved the cosmic sound aum. The deeper you go, the more private is the happening. The public world from where you can decide is just the outside. So how to decide whether one has achieved the cosmic sound, whether one has gone to the deepest ground, has known?
You cannot decide it from the outside; that is one thing. Of course, many things which can be known from the outside will begin to happen through the person who has reached, but still the feeling that he has reached the cosmic ground will just be an inference – an inference from his behavior. Behavior can be false; behavior can be imitated. Buddha walks a certain way; Buddha sleeps a certain way; Buddha talks a certain way. You can imitate it without being a buddha. Sometimes it happens that you can imitate better than Buddha – mm? – because Buddha is just unaware: whatsoever is happening is just happening. So you can imitate it in a better way, you can practice it, you can become an expert, and Buddha may not even be able to compete with you because he may not ever have repeated anything.
So from the outside imitation is possible – very easily possible. To achieve the authentic is arduous; to imitate is easy, very easy, because inside you remain the same. You can just create it outside. So it is difficult, it is difficult to say from outside, what has happened inside. One thing – you cannot decide from outside. But from inside, if you ask, “How can I know whether I have achieved the cosmic sound aum or not?” – if you ask this, then I will say that when you achieve it you know it. If someone asks, “How can I know whether I am alive or dead? How can I know?” What will we say to him? We will say that even if you can think this much – whether you are alive or dead – you are alive.
When you come to the cosmic sound, to the very ground of being, when you hear the aum – not uttered by you, not uttered by anyone, but just as a cosmic sound all around – you know. The phenomenon is so real that, really, the question never arises whether this aum, this sound, is real. The question arises whether I am real now or not. You fade, you become just unreal. You become just a phantom, a ghost. Now your reality is not like it has ever been. The real is all around.
But it may even be a dream. You also feel in a dream that everything is real, so how to decide whether this sound that you are hearing is a dream or a reality? The decision comes from a certain source. You will never be the same again – the before and after. This hearing of the sound will be a discontinuity in your existence. You will never be the same again. You will not even be able to connect yourself with your past, it will just drop. You will only remember it as if it belonged to someone else. Your memory will not be yours now. After this experience you will be reborn, and your rebirth will be the evidence. You will never be the same again. The old has dropped; you cannot find the old man again. It is nowhere now. It was there, it is now not there. For you, this will be the evidence that you have heard.
I think there is a third implication also. One can go on repeating aum, so how will one find out whether the aum one is repeating and the aum one has come upon are different or just the same? You will feel it because you are the center of the aum that you utter, and then it vibrates outside, mm? – this is the dimension. You create it just as you throw a stone into a silent lake. The stone becomes the center, and then there are waves which go outward towards the banks. When you say aum you create a center in yourself: you drop a stone, and then the sound goes out and out and out, far off from you. This is the dimension, the direction.
When you hear the sound aum, the cosmic sound, it is different. It comes; it never goes. It is not a going away from you, it is a coming to you, and the center is nowhere to be found. It just goes on coming and coming and coming and coming. You are overflowed with it. You see the difference? You are not the center, rather, you are the bank, and from some unknown center the sound waves come to you. They go on coming, they never stop. So this direction – the sound center, you, and the waves going outward – is aum uttered by you. You, not as the center, and sound waves coming and coming and coming from somewhere – the center is never known and will never be known….

Someone asked Jacob Boehme, “Where is the center of God? Where is the center of the universe?”
He said, “Either everywhere or nowhere.” Both mean the same.

So when you begin to feel that the aum is coming to you…. Let me say it in a different way. Ordinarily seekers go towards the divine, but until the divine comes to you, remember, you may just be in a fantasy, just in a dream. The seeker going to the divine, to God, to find the center – you will go on searching, but you will never find it.
How can you find the center? The center can only come to you. So it is always a false relationship – the seeker going towards God. The real relationship is completely different – godliness coming to the seeker. When you are ready, he comes. When you are open, he becomes the guest. When your invitation is valid, total, he is there. It is always a coming, never a going. So really there is not a phenomenon of man in search of God, but rather it is God in search of man.
But you are hiding, escaping, so he cannot find you. Wherever he comes, you escape. You are a closing, never an opening. He goes on knocking and your doors are shut. So when this aum begins to come, when it is a coming to you, you are just filled, you are just bathed in it – and the source is not found. If you can find the source, again it may be that someone is creating the sound from outside – and it is coming! Someone may be playing aum on some instrument, and it is coming.
There is no source of it. That’s why mystics have always said that God is the sourceless one. There is no source. It comes as if from nowhere – just out of the blue – and it is here. When you feel this, then you know that the aum is now cosmic. It doesn’t belong to you.
In Zen they use koans – puzzles, absurd puzzles – as meditation objects. Rinzai always gave to his disciples the koan of hearing the sound of one hand clapping. It is impossible. How can you hear the sound of one hand? So whenever seekers would be there he would say, “First go and find out what is the sound of one hand clapping. Hear it, and then come to me and tell me.”
It looks absurd, but when a man like Rinzai would say this to someone the person would go, close the door, sit down in meditation, and he would think. Then he would come within hours and say, “What nonsense you have asked. How can it be?”
Rinzai would say, “I have heard it, so you go and try again. I also said to my teacher, ‘How is this possible?’ but he said, ‘I have heard, so you try.’ I tried, and now I have heard. So you try – and it will come.”
The person would go on coming. Every morning he would have a darshan – go to see his teacher – and then the teacher would ask, “Have you heard?”
He would say, “No, I have not heard yet.” The teacher would tell him to try harder. So he would begin to imagine, because it is very frustrating to go every day with nothing to show to the teacher. So he would say, “Oh yes, I have heard it. It is just like wind passing through leaves.”
But the teacher would say, “No, it is not, because wind and leaves are two things. It must be of one. Wind passing through leaves is just an ordinary sound. Two things can create friction, so it is still of two hands. You cannot befool me! Wind passing through the trees – it is of two hands. Never come again unless you hear the sound of one hand.”
He would come, and again and again he would say, “I have heard this and that, or I have heard the sound of the water-drops falling on the roof.” He would come with so many things, and he would be denied. This would go on for months.
Then suddenly one day Rinzai asked, “Where is that man? He has not come and it has been so long. Go and find out what he is doing.”
He was found in his cell or under some tree, just lost, and he was brought to the teacher, and the teacher said, “Now you have heard. Haven’t you heard?”
He said, “I have heard! I have heard!”
What sound has he heard? There is only one sound, that is the sound of the cosmic aum which is without friction – not two things, but simply the sound. It is not created by any clapping.
The moment someone says, “I have heard,” he will be a different person. You cannot be the same again, mm? The difference will always be: sound coming to you from nowhere – sourceless sound, uncreated. Then it is the cosmic aum.

============================================================

Sarva karma niraakaranam aawahanam.

Cessation of the cause of all actions
is aawahanam – the invocation.
Religion is not ritual. Really, when a religion dies it becomes ritual: the dead body of a religion becomes the ritual. But ritual is to be found everywhere. If you go to find religion you will find ritual. All these names – Hindu, Mohammedan, Christian – these are not the names of religions, they are names of particular rituals. By “ritual” I mean the belief that “something done outwardly can create the inward revolution.” This belief, that something done outwardly can create an inward revolution, creates rituals.
Why does this belief come into existence? It comes because of a very natural phenomenon. Whenever there is inward revolution, whenever there is inner mutation, whenever there is some inner transformation, it is followed by many outward things and signs – it is bound to be, because the inward exists in relation to the outward. Nothing can happen inside which will not affect the outside also. It will have effects, consequences, shadows on the outside behavior also. If you feel anger inside, your body begins to take certain postures. If you begin to feel silence inside, your body will take certain other postures. When there is silence inside, the body will show it in many ways. The silence, the inner peace, the stillness will be shown by the body in many ways, but this is always secondary. The inner is basic and the outer is secondary. It is a consequence, not a cause.
Whenever this happens, for example, if a buddha happens to be here, we cannot see what is happening inside him, but we can see, we will see, what is happening outside. For the buddha himself, the inner is the cause and the outer the consequence. For us, the outer will be the first thing to be noticed and then the inner will be inferred. So for onlookers the outer, the secondary, becomes the basic, the primary.
How can we know what has happened in the buddha’s inner consciousness? – but we can observe his body, his movements, his gestures. They are related to the inner, they show something, but they are related not as causes but as consequences. So you cannot go back; the vice versa will not be true. If the inner is there, the outer will follow, but the vice versa is not true: if the outer is there, there is no necessity that the inner should follow – there is no necessity.
For example, if I am angry, then my body will show anger, but I can show anger in my body without being angry at all. An actor is doing that. He is expressing anger through his eyes, through his hands; he is expressing love without feeling anything inside; he is showing fear, his whole body is trembling and shaking, but there is no fear inside.
So the outer can be without the inner, we can impose it. There is no reason, there is no basis, no necessity, no inevitability, that the inner should follow the outer. The outer always follows the inner, but never the vice versa. Ritual is born because of this fallacy.
We see a buddha sitting in a silent posture – in siddhasan, the most relaxed posture for the body. This posture is a consequence of an inner quietude because the consciousness has become so still that the body follows it, and the body spontaneously takes the most relaxed posture. But for us the body is the first thing to be noticed. We see the body first, so we say that Buddha achieved liberation in this posture. Really, quite the reverse is the case: because Buddha achieved liberation, this posture followed. This posture is not a cause. So you can practice the posture, you can become efficient in the posture – but don’t wait for the liberation to come. The posture will be there, but liberation will not come.
Someone is praying. His hands are raised or his head is surrendered unto some unknown feet. This is an outward posture. When surrendering really happens inside, this posture follows. When surrendering happens inside, when one begins to feel a nothingness, when one begins to feel to just dissolve into the infinite, this posture follows. You can imitate the posture, but surrendering will not follow.
When I say this posture follows, I don’t mean that it is bound to follow for everyone. With every individual there will be differences. It will depend on the culture, on the upbringing, on the climate, on many things. There is no intrinsic necessity for the posture to follow. What will follow will depend on many many things. For example, if a buddha is not born in India but in a culture, in a society, where no one sits on the ground, do you think enlightenment will not come to him? It will come on a chair! Of course, when he is sitting in a chair he will sit in a different way. When enlightenment comes to him he will totally relax, but that relaxation will be different, outwardly, from a siddhasan.
Mahavira achieved liberation in a very strange posture. It is known as goduhasan, the posture of a cowherd milking a cow – the same posture as a cowherd milking a cow. In that posture Mahavira was enlightened. Never before and never afterwards has anyone achieved liberation in that posture. He was not milking a cow! Why did this happen? It must have something to do with Mahavira’s own bodily habits; it might be concerned with his past incarnations. Nothing is known about why this happened.
The basic thing is that outward things follow some in-ward happenings. They, too, are not fixed laws. From individual to individual they differ. It depends; it depends on many things. But the society begins to feel a necessary connection, a cause-effect connection, between outward things and inward. Then the ritual is born. “Ritual” means that we will do something outward, and the inner will follow. This is the most fallacious thing possible. This fallacy destroys every religion, and every religion ultimately becomes just a ritualistic nonsense.
In this Upanishad, this ritualistic understanding is denied totally, but denied in a very positive way. So one thing must be understood very distinctly and clearly.
The Upanishads were born in a very revolutionary period as far as the Indian mind is concerned: there was a great rebellion against the Vedas. When I say against the Vedas, I mean the ritualistic structure that was built around the Vedas. It was a dead ritual; everything was a ritual. Religion was not something deep, not something concerned with consciousness and its transformation, rather, it was just concerned with doing something: “If you do this, then you will get this; if you do that, then you will get that.” Every ritual was fixed as if it was a science: “Do this prayer and there will be rain; do this prayer and the enemy will be killed; do this prayer and you will be victorious – do this and this will follow.” This was proposed as if it was a science.
This ritualistic structure killed the very progressive spirit of the Indian mind. A revolution followed; it was bound to follow. It took two shapes. One was negative – Jaina and Buddhist. These two currents of thinking took a very negative turn. They said, “Rituals are meaningless, absurd, so all rituals should be abolished.” This was an absolutely negative attitude. The Upanishads were also against rituals, but they took a very positive attitude. They said, “Ritual is not absurd, but you misunderstand the meaning of it.”
This sutra is concerned with a yagna ritual, aawahanam – invocation. The word aawahanam – invocation – means that before you begin any worship, any yagna, any prayer, first invoke the deities, first call them. “Aawahanam” means: invite them, invoke them. As far as it goes it is good. How can you pray unless you have invited? How can you surrender unless you have invoked?
So these are the ways. The negative way will be first: that it is useless because there are no deities. Second: they have no names even if there are. Third: even if they have names they will not respond because whatsoever you are doing is just bribery, just flattery. Do you think that by your flattery, by your prayers, by your briberies, you will be able to invoke them? If you think that you can invoke them and call them and invite them, then they are not even worth it – because if you can bribe them, then they are just like you. The language is the same and the level also, so they are not worth it.
Buddha has said: “There are no deities, and even if there are they are not higher than human beings. They are not higher. You can persuade them, you can bribe them through your flattery – stuti. You can force them to do something or not to do something, so they are not higher than you. They can be just forgotten.”
The Upanishads take a very different attitude. They say that deities are there and invocation is possible, but they give a much deeper meaning to invocation. They say:
Cessation of the cause of all actions is invocation.
They don’t deny anything. They give a new meaning, and the ritual becomes nonritualistic. They say, of course invocation is possible, but by invocation is meant Cessation of the cause of all actions….
They say the same thing the Buddha also says. Buddha denies. He says, “There is no invocation. The only path is to be desireless, so don’t ask for any help from anyone, no one can help you. Just be desireless and you will attain nirvana, bliss, peace, the ultimate. So don’t ask anyone’s help, don’t invoke anyone, just be desireless.”
This becomes even more pertinent because a person who is invoking a deity is invoking him because of some desire. He wants something – money, prestige, victory, anything. He is invoking the deity, praying for something. So Buddha says, “You are just running from one desire to another, and this running after desires is the dukkha – is the misery. No one can help you unless you become desireless.”
Cessation of the cause of all actions…means to be desireless.
What is the cause of action? Why are you involved in so much action? Why this constant running? What is the cause? Desire is the cause. So in a very poetic way the Upanishad denies the ritual and yet not the term; denies the ritual, yet not the spirit.
Buddha failed because a negative mind cannot really succeed for long. He can be very appealing, because negativity strikes hard. He can be very logical, because to say no is the very spirit of logic – of being logical. Really, whenever you want to say no you need logic. If you want to say yes logic is not needed, reason is not needed. You can say yes without any reasoning, but you cannot say no without any reasoning. The moment you say no logic will be required, so no is always logical.
A modern logician, De Bono, says that the purpose of logic is really to say no in a reasonable way, in a rational way. The very purpose of logic is to say no and then to adduce reasons, proofs, for saying no. Buddha said no; it appealed. His approach was logical, rational, everything was perfect – but yet he couldn’t get roots in the Indian soil. He was soon uprooted. This is a very strange fact: that he could get ground in China, in Japan, in Burma, in Ceylon, everywhere in Asia except India. The secret is that the Buddhist monks learned their error when they left India. The no was the error, so they never used negative attitudes anywhere else. They became positive. In China they began to say yes: in Ceylon they have said yes. Then everywhere they succeeded, because yes has a very magical secret of success.
It may not appeal to reason: it appeals to the heart. In the end heart wins – never reason. Really, reason never wins in the end. You can silence someone with logical reasoning, but you can never convert him, you can never change him. Even if he cannot say anything against you, he will still be convinced of his own mind. Unless the yes is evoked, he cannot be converted. So Buddha tried hard, but with a no – everywhere no. Whatsoever he was saying was the same as the Upanishad is saying, it was not a bit different. Only the methodology he chose was negative, and the reason might be that he was a kshatriya – a warrior – and a warrior lives with a no.
The Upanishads came through brahmins. They were beggars, and a beggar lives with a yes. Even if you deny him, a real beggar, an authentic beggar, will bless you. He lives with a total yes, that is his secret. He cannot use no. A warrior, a kshatriya, can use yes only when he is defeated, and then too from his heart he will never say yes, he will continue to say no. All the Jaina tirthankaras were kshatriyas. Buddha was a kshatriya. They both took negative attitudes.
The Upanishads are based on a positive yes. They are yea-sayers. Even if they have to say no, they will say it in such a way that yes is used. Really, this Upanishad is saying there is no aawahanam, no invocation, but no is not used at all. They turn it into a yes. They say, Cessation of the cause of all actions is the invocation. It is not related at all with the invocation of the Vedas, with the priests. It is not related at all. It is related to the same rebellious teaching which says that being desireless is the ultimate state of purity. Unless you are pure, how can you invite the divine?
Really, being pure is the invitation. No other invitation is needed. The moment you are pure, the moment the heart is pure, the divine comes. Just being pure is the invitation; so don’t call, don’t cry for the divine, just be pure and he will come.
How can this purity be achieved and why are we impure? What is the reason? The Indian genius has always been thinking in terms of desire and desirelessness. Really, everything that we are can be reduced to desire; whatsoever we are is because of our desire. If we are miserable, if we are in bondage, if we are ignorant, if we are in darkness, if life is just a long death, it is because of desire.
Why is there misery? Because your desire is frustrated. Unless you have a desire, how can it be frustrated? So if you want to be frustrated desire more, then you will be more frustrated. If you want to be in misery then expect more, desire more, be ambitious for more, and you will get more misery. If you don’t want to be miserable, then don’t desire.
So this is the mathematics of inner workings: desire creates misery. If desire fails, it necessarily creates misery, but even if desire succeeds, it again creates misery – because the moment you succeed your desire has gone ahead, it is asking for more. Really, the desire is always ahead of you. Wherever you reach it will be ahead of you, and you will never reach the point where you and your desire can meet; that is impossible. Desire means something always in the future, never in the present. You are always in the present and desire is always in the future. Wherever you are, you will be in the present and desire will always be in the future.
It is just like the horizon. You see just a few miles to where the sky is touching the earth, and it looks so real, but go ahead and find the place where the sky touches the earth, and the more you go ahead, the more the horizon goes ahead. The distance remains always the same because, really, it never touches anywhere. The touching, the contact line, is just false. So when you go to seek the horizon you will never find it, but it will always remain there, just you will never meet, and you can continue to be in the illusion that the horizon is there – a little more distance to be traversed. You may go around the whole earth and come back to your home never meeting the horizon anywhere, but the illusion can continue.
Desire is just like the horizon. It seems to meet, it seems to be fulfilled soon, the distance is not much: “Just a little more effort, just a bit of fast running and it is just near,” but you never reach it. It is always just near and the distance remains the same. Howsoever you run, the distance remains the same.
Has any desire ever been fulfilled? Don’t ask others, ask yourself. Have you realized any desire, ever? But we don’t even wait to think about it. We have no time to think about the past; the future obsesses us. We are in such a hurry to reach the horizon, who will think that we have missed this horizon so many times? There is no time to think – the hurry is such, and life is so short, and one has to run and go on running. Have you achieved anything through any desire or does frustration always come? Aren’t ashes always in the hand and nothing else? But one never sees the ashes in the hand, one never sees the frustration. The eyes are always again fixed on the far-off horizon.
This fixation with the horizon is the cause of all actions, and no action reaches a fulfillment – because our actions are just mad. If the horizon itself is not there, then your running is mad. So desire is the cause of all actions and of all misery, of all impurity and of all ignorance.
Cessation of the cause – cessation of desiring – is the invocation. If you cease to desire, then there will be no running – no running after anything, no movement inside, no ripples – just a silent pool of consciousness, a silent pool without waves, without ripples. No movement! The Upanishads say this state of consciousness is the invocation.
But does it mean that all actions cease when desire ceases? – because we have seen a Krishna moving, doing many things. We have seen a Buddha doing many things even after the enlightenment. So what does cessation of the cause of all actions mean? It doesn’t mean cessation of all actions, it means the cause, the desire, ceases. When there is no desire, actions begin to take an altogether different quality. When there is no desire, then action becomes just a play – with no madness in it, with no insanity behind it, with no obsession. It becomes just a play, a playfulness.
Really, the modern psychiatrists say that this is a criterion as to whether someone is insane or sane – an insane person cannot play. An insane person cannot play; even if he plays he will become so serious about it that the play will become a work. Real sanity consists in transforming even work into play. When there is no desire you can play – and if nothing comes out of it, there is no frustration because nothing was expected. The play in itself was enough. That is the difference between work and play.
Work is never enough unto itself, it is always meant for some result. The result has a real value, the end, and work is only a means. You work to achieve something; no one works for work’s sake. So work is in the present and the result is always in the future, and it all depends on the result. Work in itself is just a burden to be carried somehow, because it is the end that is to be achieved. If you can achieve the end without the work, you will never work.
Play has a different dimension – altogether different, diametrically opposite. There is really no result to be achieved. Play is for play’s sake, but we have become so insane that we cannot even play for play’s sake. So even through play we try to achieve some result, to win something – prestige, medals, anything, but something must be there as an end to be achieved. So, really, grown-ups never play; only children play – with nothing beyond. That’s why the play of children has an innocence and a beauty; the thing is enough unto itself.
When a child is playing he is totally absorbed in it – not a single desire out of it, running and going somewhere; not a bit of consciousness beyond it, everything is in it. The child has become just the play – totally involved, committed to this moment here and now; nothing exists beyond it. This is action, but without the cause, without desire.
That’s why we have called this world not really a creation of the divine but a leela, a play of the divine, because “creation” is not a good word, it is ugly. It is ugly because you create something for something. No, the divine is only playing – just playing like a child with no result in the mind. The play itself is blissful. So to say: Cessation of the cause of all actions is invocation, means to be just like a child – innocent, pure, without any desire. Then you have invoked the divine. Then you have called, invited.
Now your invocation cannot be denied, it is so authentic and so sincere. Really, now you need not even invoke and the divine will be there, you need not even call and the divine will be there – because you have created the situation. The divine will flow, come down. You have created the situation – the purity of the heart. This is the only invocation. All else is again just desire, action.
Jesus says that unless you are like a child you cannot enter into the kingdom of the divine. “Like a child”: what does it mean? It means that you are capable of playing, that you are capable of action without desire.
For us it is inconceivable. How can we act without desire? Take the opposite case: can you desire without action? You can desire, you can desire without action, so desire can exist alone without action – mm? – everyone is desiring, there are many, many desires without any actions. So desire can be without action: this is our experience. Why not the opposite? Can actions be without desire? If desire can be severed from action, why not action from desire? That too is possible. When desire is not there, action doesn’t cease; it becomes different. The flavor is different, the intrinsic quality is different – the madness is not there and this very moment, the present, has become meaningful and not the future.
So take this to heart: if the future is very meaningful to you, you cannot invoke. If the present is the only significance and the future doesn’t exist at all, then you have invoked. The future is the bondage, because without the future you cannot desire. Desire needs space in which to move. It cannot move just in the present; the present has no space. It cannot move. How can you desire for just now? You can desire only in the tomorrow. Really, the future is created because of our desiring – there is no future, the future doesn’t exist.
Ordinarily we say that time has three divisions – past, present and future. Really, time has only one, and that is the present. The past is that which is not; the future is that which is not yet. They both are not. Past only means desires that are dead, and future means desires that are still alive – and the present is untouched by your past and by your future.
So, really, past and future are not divisions of time, but parts of mind. Time is the present; mind is the past and future. Mind has two divisions, past and future; and time has only one, the present. That’s why mind and time never meet. They cannot meet, because mind has no present, and time has no past and no future. If there were no mind on the earth, would there be any future or past? There would be only the present. Flowers, of course, would flower, but in the present. Trees would, of course, grow, but in the present. There would be no past and no future. With men, or rather with mind, comes past and future. Really, if you look into a child he has no past. How can he have? That’s why he is never burdened – because the past becomes a burden.
An old man is always burdened. There is a past, a long past – so many dead desires, so many frustrations, so many horizons never found, so many rainbows just broken. He has a long past and he is just burdened. An old man is always thinking about the past, remembering, going again and again into the memory. An old man, by and by, begins to forget the future, because now the future only means death and nothing else. So he never tries to look into the future, he begins to look back. A child is always looking forward, never back, because there is nothing to look back to. For an old man there is only death to look to in the future and nothing else.
A young man is in the present, so a young man cannot understand children and he cannot understand old men. They both look just foolish – both! Children look foolish because they are unnecessarily wasting their time, unnecessarily playing with toys. An old man just looks dead, just unnecessarily worried. A young man cannot understand really, because he cannot see what has happened to an old man – that he is now only the past. This happens.
But every young man will become old, and every child will become young, and every old man was once young and once a child – because the mind moves, it goes on moving. In children it has a vast expanse to move. With an old mind it has no expanse to move further. But this is movement of the mind, not of time.
Really, we think that time is moving. No, we are moving. We just go on moving: time is not moving at all. Time is the present; time is always here and now. It has always been here and now, it will always be here and now. We go on moving. We move from past to future, and for us time is just a bridge to move from the past into the future – from one desire to another desire. Time is just a passage. For us, time is just a passage to move from one desire to another. If desires cease, then your movement will cease, and if your movement ceases, you will meet with time here and now – and that meeting is the door. That meeting is the door, that meeting is the invocation.
But when the Upanishad says, Cessation of the cause…does it mean to say, “Do not desire”? It is very natural for our minds to translate things like that. If the Upanishad says, Cessation of the cause of all actions…it means a state of desirelessness. Remember it: a state of desirelessness. But our minds will translate it as “Do not desire.” You have missed the point if you translate it as “Do not desire,” because even if you do not desire, you will desire. Your “Do not desire” will imply desire. You may desire to invoke the divine, you may desire to be purified, to be pure, to be innocent, childlike, to reach that realm of play. So your mind can say to you, “If you want to enter the kingdom of God, do not desire.”
This is a desire. This is how desire works: “If you want to get into the kingdom of God, if you want enlightenment, if you want a meeting with the divine, do not desire.” So this is the logic of desire. “Do not do this if you want that; do this if you want that.” So when I say a state of desirelessness, I don’t mean a commandment which says, “Do not desire!”
Then what do I mean? It becomes difficult, complex to understand. Then what do I mean when I say “a state of desirelessness”? It means: understand desire, understand the fallaciousness of desire, understand the absurdity of desire, the futility of it, the nonsense of it. Just understand what desire has done, what desire can do, what desire is doing. Just understand desire, and if you understand it totally you will be desireless. That desirelessness will be just an outcome of your understanding. It cannot be anything out of your action. That “do not” is again an action.
This translation of things creates many unnecessary problems. So I have seen people who say, “Do not be greedy if you want to achieve the divine,” but they never feel that this is greed – and a greater one. This is a most extraordinary greed, rare. One wants to achieve the divine, so one must not be greedy. What does greed mean? Not to be greedy means not to desire, not to want. But you are wanting the divine, moksha, so: “Don’t be greedy. If you want to possess the divine, then don’t possess anything else. Be nonpossessive. Renounce, if you want to get!” This renouncing becomes just a step, so it is just a methodology for getting – but you are still for getting.
Really, unless you cease this craving to get you will never be mature. So look at it in this way: a child is born and the first state of mind is one of getting. The child is getting everything – the milk, the food, the love. He is not giving anything: he is just getting. This is the most immature state of mind – just getting. When an old man is also trying to get, he has remained just an immature person. It is okay for a child to be in a state of constant getting, he is getting everything. The child cannot even conceive of what giving means. So when you say to a child, “Give your toy to this boy,” he cannot even conceive of what you mean. The language is unknown, the language of giving is unknown. He can only get.
You have to train the child according to his language. So you say, “Give this toy to this boy, then I will give you more love.” Now you have to translate even giving into getting. “If you don’t give, then we will not give you love.” So a child begins to learn that if you want to get you will have to give. This giving becomes just a stepping-stone to get more. This is the state of our minds always; then we remain just immature. We are in a state of getting; if sometimes we have to give, it is only to get something else.
This purity of heart means quite the opposite of getting – just giving. That is the most mature mind. A child, the immature mind, is always concerned with getting. A Buddha, a Jesus, is always giving. That is the other extreme – giving not to get something, but giving because giving is a play, a bliss in itself. When I say understand desire, I mean understand getting, under-stand giving. Understand that your state is just of getting, getting and getting, and you will never be fulfilled – mm? – because there is no end.
Understand this: What have you got through this constant, eternal getting? What have you got? You are as poor as ever, as much a beggar as ever – rather, more. The more you get, the more you become a greater beggar, the more is the desire to get. So you only learn by getting, more getting. Where have you reached? What have you found? What is there which you can say is the achievement of this constant, mad getting? Nothing!
If you can understand this, the very understanding becomes a transformation; the getting drops. The moment getting drops a new dimension opens; you begin to give. This is the paradox: you have not got anything through getting – but when you give, you get. But that “get” is not concerned with your getting at all. The giving itself is a deep achievement, a deep fulfillment.
When I am saying this, I am afraid you may again translate it. You may say, “Okay. So to achieve that fulfillment we must leave this constant desire to get.” Understand this; don’t translate it. Your mind can distort anything. It has distorted everything. It distorts a Buddha, it distorts a Krishna, it distorts a Jesus, it distorts a Zarathustra – it goes on distorting. They say something, you translate it, and then it is something else altogether different – diametrically opposite even.
The understanding of desire becomes desirelessness; the knowing of desire is the cessation of desire. So know deeply, understand deeply. Don’t take any hurried step, and then a purity is discovered which is always there, which has always been there. The heart is pure already, but only covered with desires, with smoke, and you cannot look deeply.
This is invocation: if you are pure you have invoked. So be pure and the divine will be invoked. Nothing else is needed, not even a belief in the divine is needed. You need not believe that there is divine energy. You need not believe that there is someone – no need. Just be pure, and you will come to know. The divine is not a belief, it is a knowledge, a knowing.
When I say “purity” you may again misunderstand me, because for “purity” we have very moralistic connotations. We say a man is pure because he is moral, a man is pure because he is not a thief, a man is pure because he is not dishonest, a man is pure because he lives under the rules and regulations of his society; but if the society itself is impure, then by living according to its rules and regulations how can you be pure? If the society itself is dishonest, then by following it how can you be honest? If the whole foundation and structure is just immoral, then to adjust to it is the most immoral act possible.
So what really happens is that the more moral a person is, the more he goes against the society – because he cannot adjust. A Jesus has to be crucified: he becomes “immoral” because the whole society is immoral. A Socrates has to be poisoned. Why? Because a really moral man cannot exist in an immoral society.
Whenever an immoral society pays respect to someone and says that he is moral, it means only that he is adjusted and nothing else – adjusted to the society. Whatsoever the society has said, he follows. Really, he may be just dead. He may have no conscience of his own; he cannot assert anything. He is not – he just follows. He becomes very moral. So for “purity” we have a very moral connotation.
No, purity means innocence, and all those persons we call “moral” are very cunning, they are not innocent at all – because if you think that to be a thief is bad, or to be a thief is not respectable, or to be a thief you will have to suffer in hell, or by not being a thief you are going to gain heaven, then you are very cunning and calculating. You are not a thief because of your calculations and cunningness, and it may be that the person who is a thief and suffering imprisonment is less cunning and less calculating. That’s why he is suffering – he has become a thief. You are more cunning, more calculating, so you are moral and honest – but not pure.
Purity means innocence; innocence means a noncalculating mind. I don’t mean that he will be a thief. How can an innocent person be a thief? If he cannot calculate, how can he be a thief? – mm? To be a thief one needs calculation; not to be a thief, one again needs calculation. An innocent person is neither moral nor immoral, he is just innocent. That innocence is purity.
Jesus has been condemned for many things which his society thought immoral – because a prostitute invites him to come to her home and he goes. Then the whole village begins to be filled with rumors: “Jesus has gone to a prostitute’s house. Why should he go? A moral man can never go to a prostitute’s house.” This is what you would have thought also: “Why should Jesus go there? What is the need? Not only has he gone, he has remained the whole night.” He has slept there, and in the morning, of course, whatever can happen in a “moral” village happens. Everyone is against him. Even his friends are not with him now, even his followers have escaped, and the village encounters him and asks him, “Why did you go to a prostitute’s house?” and Jesus says, “Who is not a prostitute, tell me? How do you decide and how do you judge? What are the criteria?”
This is a noncalculating person. He says he cannot judge who is a prostitute and who is not. He cannot judge. How can he judge, and who is he to judge? Here is an innocent man, a pure man, but he is to be crucified because you cannot think that he is innocent, you cannot think that he is pure. How can he be pure when he has slept in a prostitute’s house? Our minds are really so immoral and so impure that we cannot conceive of a different dimension of purity. And this same prostitute is the only person who remains when Jesus is crucified. Everyone has escaped; no one is there. Only this prostitute, Mary Magdalene, is standing there – the only person! No apostle is there; no follower is there. They have all escaped because it is dangerous to be there, even they can be crucified. Only this prostitute is standing there, and this prostitute helped to take Jesus’ dead body down from the cross. So it seems pertinent to ask “Who is not a prostitute?” Was it good for Jesus to stay with this prostitute or not? – because only this poor woman remained with him in the end.
What is moral and what is immoral? As far as religion is concerned, innocence is moral and cunningness is immoral. To be innocent is enough. That childlike innocence is the purity. That purity becomes aawahanam – invocation.
We have distorted everything, every word. Every word has become just ugly. When you say that someone is pure what do you mean? Just find out the meaning and you will find very ugly things. By “someone is pure,” what do you mean? Innocence? Never – because innocence can be dangerous. Innocence may not fit into your pattern. Really, it will not fit. How can it fit? You cannot persuade it, you cannot force it, you cannot bribe it – and the society depends on force, on bribery, on persuasion, on punishment, on appraisal, on fear, on greed. So we say that if you do this, you will get this.
Many, many have asked Buddha, “If we follow you, what will we get?” and Buddha says, “Nothing.” So how can you follow this man? He says, “Nothing.”
We are always out to get something. Even from a Buddha we want to get something, promises: “If you promise us this, then we can do this.” Then it becomes logical to us, relevant. Buddha says, “Be pure, and you get nothing.” Then why be pure? Then it is better to be impure, at least then we are getting something. Buddha says that you have not got anything. You are only in the illusion of getting and you will never get.
So I say just be pure and forget getting, because unless you forget getting you cannot be pure. If you have to get something, you have to be cunning and calculating. You have to be violent, you have to be greedy, and you have to be always in the future, never here. Then you can never remain at home. You are always abroad, somewhere else, always on a journey.
To be desireless, pure, is to have a deep understanding of the futility of all that we have been doing, of all that we are. The moment this purity is there, invocation happens. Then you have called, then you have asked and invited. Then, in the very deepest core of existence, your invitation has penetrated. Now, suddenly you feel that you have been taken over, someone has come into you. Now you are possessed by something else which is more than you. Something infinite, something more vital has come. You have been taken over, you are flooded – for this flooding is the invocation.
Of course you have to be open, otherwise this flooding will not happen. An innocent mind is always open; a cunning mind is always closed. A cunning mind is always in defense. A cunning mind always thinks in terms of enmity, competition, because if you are to get something then you have to be a competitor. Everyone is. Everyone is out to get, and you also have to get. Then you have to be a competitor, and this is a very tough competition. So you have to be violent, cunning, closed, defensive. Then you cannot be flooded by the divine. You are so narrow, so closed, that the flood cannot come to you.
A pure heart, a desireless heart, is not competitive, not concerned for the future, not against anybody, not for anybody, with no calculations, with no desire to get, with no achieving mind. A pure heart is here and now; open, with no defense. When I say with no defense, I mean that even if death comes it is open. If you are not open for death, you will never be open for the divine. If you are afraid of death, you will be afraid of the divine.
But this is strange, because whenever we are afraid of death we always go to the divine to pray. So all those who are praying in mosques, in temples, in churches, are really not praying, they are just afraid of death. They are making arrangements with the divine in order that they should not be afraid. Their prayer is based on fear and their gods are just created out of fear.
If the mind is innocent, you can be like a child playing with a snake. Now he is open for both. Death can come and he is open; he can play with death. The divine can come and he is open; he can play with the divine. Death and the divine are, in a subtle way, one. If you are not open to death you will never be open for the divine, and a person who is concerned with desires is always afraid of death.
You must see the relationship. A person who is concerned with desires is desirous, is out to get something – is always afraid of death. Why? Because desire is in the future and death is also in the future, and it may be that death comes first and desire is not fulfilled. Remember this: desire is never in the present; death is also never in the present. No one has died in the present. Can you be fearful of death here and now? No, because either you are alive or dead. If you are alive here and now, there is no death; and if you are already dead, there is no fear. So you can only fear death in the future. Desires have a planning for the future and death may disturb everything, so we are fearful of death.
No animal is afraid of death because no animal has plannings for the future. There is no other reason than this: no plannings for the future. The future is not, so death is not! Why be afraid of death if there is no planning for the future? Nothing is to be disturbed by death. The more you have planned, the greater the plans, then the greater the fear. Death is not really a fear that you will die, but a fear that you will die unfulfilled. It may not be possible to carry desires to their fulfillment, and death may come any time.
If I am to die unfulfilled, of course there is fear: “I am as yet unfulfilled. I have not known a moment of fulfillment and death may come, so I have lived in vain. I have been a futility, just a uselessness. I have lived without any fulfillment, without any peak, without any moment of truth, beauty, peace, silence. I have just lived in futility, meaninglessness, and death may come any moment.” Then death becomes a fear.
If I am fulfilled, if I have known that which life can allow one to know, if I have felt what living really is, if I have known a single moment of beauty and love and fulfillment, where is the fear of death? Where is the fear? Death can come; it cannot disturb anything, it cannot destroy anything. Death can only destroy the future. For me, the future is now nothing. I am fulfilled this very moment. Then death cannot do anything. I can accept it; it may even prove to be a bliss.
So one who is open to death can be open to the divine. Openness means fearlessness. Innocence gives you openness, fearlessness, a vulnerability with no defense arrangements. That is invocation.
If you are just in that moment when even death can come to you and you receive it, embrace it, welcome it – then you have invoked the divine. Now death will never come, only the divine will come. Even in death, death will not be there now, only the divine.

Marpa, a Tibetan mystic, is dying. Everyone is weeping and Marpa shouts, “Stop! On such a moment of celebration, why are you weeping? I am going to meet the divine – he is just here and now.” He laughs and he smiles and he sings the last song, and everyone goes on weeping because no one can see the divine there – everyone is seeing death.
Marpa says, “The divine is here and now. Why are you weeping? Such a moment of celebration. Such a moment of festivity. Sing and dance and enjoy – because Marpa is going to meet the friend. The divine is here just now. I have waited long and now the moment has come. Why are you weeping?” Marpa cannot understand why they are weeping; they cannot understand why Marpa is singing. Has he gone mad? Of course, for us he has gone mad. Death is there and it seems that he has gone mad. Marpa is seeing something else. Marpa was really one of the most open flowerings of humankind.

When Marpa comes to his teacher, the teacher says, “Faith is the key.”
So Marpa says, “Then give me something to try my faith. If faith is the key, then give me something to try my faith.”
They are sitting on a hill and the teacher says, “Jump!” and Marpa jumps. Even the teacher thinks he will die. Many, many followers are there and they think that he is just mad, that they will not even find a piece of his bones.
They rush down, and Marpa is sitting there singing and dancing. The teacher asks, “What has happened?” It seems like a coincidence. The teacher thinks silently in his mind that it is just a coincidence: “Why? This is impossible! How did this happen? It is a coincidence, so I must try him in some other ways.” Then many ways are tried.
The teacher tells Marpa to go into a burning house. He goes, and he comes out without even being touched by the flames. He is ordered to jump into the ocean, and he jumps. There are many, many trials, and the teacher cannot say now that this is just a coincidence, so he asks Marpa, “What is your secret?”
“My secret?” says Marpa. “You told me faith is the key, so I took your word for it.”
The teacher says, “Now stop because I am afraid. Anything may happen.”
Marpa says, “Now anything can happen because I just took your word. Now if you yourself are wavering, I cannot take it. I thought faith was the key, but now it will not work. So please don’t order me again. Next time I will die, so don’t order me again.”
This is purity – childlike purity. In Tibet, Marpa is known as Marpa the Faithful – just childlike faith.
So the story is told that Marpa became the teacher of his own teacher, and his teacher bowed down and said, “Now give me the key of faith because I don’t have any. I was just talking, I have only heard that faith is the key so I was just talking. Now you give it to me.” So Marpa became the teacher of his own teacher.

The purity, the innocence, the noncalculating mind…. There is not a single moment of calculation and cunningness – not even to see how deep the abyss is. Not asking, “Am I to take it verbally, or is it just a metaphor, or are you just saying something in mystical language? Am I really to jump, or do you mean some inner jump?” With no calculation, no cunningness, he jumps. The teacher says, “Jump,” and he jumps; there is no gap between the two. A single moment’s gap, and there is calculation. A single moment’s gap, and you have calculated.
This purity opens you; you become an opening. That is the invocation.

============================================================

Osho,
Last night you said that desires move between the dead past and
the imaginary future.
Please explain how and why this dead past proves so dynamic and powerful that it compels a person to flow into the process of endless desire.
How can one be free from this dynamic past, the unconscious and
the collective unconscious?
The past is not dynamic at all: it is totally dead. But still it has a weight – a dead weight. That dead weight works. It is not dynamic at all. Why the dead weight works has to be understood.
The past is so forceful because it is the known, the experienced, and mind always feels fearful of the unknown, the unexperienced. How can you desire the unknown? You cannot desire the unknown. Only the known can be desired, so desires are always repetitious. They repeat, they are circular. You always move in the same pattern, in the same circle. The mind becomes just a groove of repetitions, and the more you repeat a particular thing the more weighty it becomes, because the groove goes deep.
So the past is important not because it is dynamic; it forces you to do something and to desire not because it is forceful, powerful, alive, but only because it is a dead groove. The past has been repeated so many times, that to repeat it has become easy and automatic. The more you repeat a particular thing, the more easy and convenient it becomes. The basic convenience is this: that if you are repeating a thing, you need not be aware.
Awareness is the most inconvenient thing. If you are repeating a particular thing, then you need not be aware. You can be just deeply asleep and the thing can be repeated automatically, mechanically. So it is convenient to repeat the past because you need not be aware. You can go on sleeping and the mind will repeat itself.
That’s why those who say that desirelessness is the state of bliss, also say that desirelessness is synonymous with awareness. You cannot be desireless unless you are totally aware. Or, if you are aware, you will find that you are desireless, because desires can have a repetitive force upon the mind only when you are not aware. So the more asleep the mind is, the more repetitive and mechanical. The past has the grip only because it is a repetition and because it is the known. How can you desire the unknown?
For the unknown there can be no desire; the unknown is inconceivable. That’s why, even when we begin to desire God, we are not desiring the unknown. By “God” we must mean something which is known. So go deep: what do you mean by “God”? – particularly your God. What do you mean by it? You will find under the garb of “God” something known, something experienced.
It may be eternal pleasure. So the so-called religious persons go on saying, “Why are you wasting your life in desires which are momentary? Come to us. Here is the fulfillment. Here is the possibility to achieve permanent, eternal pleasure.” The language can be understood. You know the momentary pleasure, so you can desire permanent pleasure – but under the garb of “God” there is pleasure.
You may be seeking God only because you are fearful of death. Then, under the garb of “God,” you are really asking for immortality, to not ever die, an eternal life. You know this life – that is your experience – now you want to make it eternal. So whenever we talk about God, the divine, liberation, moksha, don’t be deceived by the words because the words may be hiding something totally different – and they are hiding, because how can you desire the unknown? How can you conceive of it? How can you ask for it?
Really, the phenomenon is quite different. When you are not in desire the unknown comes to you – you cannot desire it. When you are desireless the unknown comes to you. You cannot desire it. The state of desirelessness is the opening for the unknown to come. You cannot desire it because the very desire will become the hindrance.
So mind goes on repeating; it is a mechanical thing. So the dynamism is not in the mind – mind is just a dead, mechanical thing – the dynamism is in your consciousness, and if your consciousness is identified with the mind then the dead mind becomes dynamic. The dynamism belongs to your energy, it is not part of your mind. You are the dynamism behind it. If you are identified with the mind, if you think that you are the mind, then the mind begins to be dynamic. If you are not identified with the mind, then the mind is just dead – just a dead weight, just a mechanical accumulation.
It is a long accumulation – millennia of evolution, many, many, many lives are accumulated there. It is not only that your mind belongs to this life, it belongs to life as such. It has evolved, so it has deep grooves. It is not only that you fall in love: your father and mother have fallen in love, their fathers and their mothers, and theirs and theirs – they have all fallen in love. The mind has a deep groove of falling in love, so when you fall in love don’t be deceived that you are falling in love. The whole humanity is behind you; the whole humanity has made the groove. It is in your bones, it is in your cells, it is in your very metabolism. Every cell has a sex part in it, and every cell has a groove, and every cell has a mind, memory – long memories, beginningless memories. So if you are identified with this mind it becomes a force – a dynamic force. You give the energy; but the dead machine begins to move, you pedal it.
So remember: energy belongs to you, dynamism belongs to you. Mind is a mechanical thing produced by millennia of evolution, but it has deep grooves, and if you are identified then you will have to flow through those grooves. Then there is no escape.
So the first thing is how not to identify, how to remember constantly that mind is one thing and you are something else. It is difficult, it is arduous, but it is possible. It is not impossible. If you once have even a moment’s glimpse of unidentified existence, then you will never be the same again. Once you come to know that mind is not the force: “I am the force, the vitality comes from me,” if even for a single moment you have the glimpse of your mastery, then mind will never be master again. Only then can you move into the unknown.
Mind cannot move into the unknown: it is produced by the known. It is a product of the known, so it cannot move into the unknown. That’s why mind can never know what truth is, what the divine is. Mind can never know what freedom is, mind can never know what life is, because intrinsically mind is dead. It is dead; dust accumulated through centuries and centuries – just dust, memory dust.
It seems that mind forces you. It doesn’t force you really, it only gives you the easiest grooves. It supplies you with only the repeated, routine tracks and you fall victim to convenience, because to break a new route and to create a new track and to move in a new groove is very difficult and inconvenient. That is what is meant by tapa – austerity. If you begin to move in some new grooves which are created not by the mind but created by consciousness, then you are in tapascharya – in austerity. It is arduous.
Gurdjieff had many exercises. One exercise was to sometimes deny the mechanism. You are hungry: just deny and let your body suffer. You be just calm and quiet, and remember that the body is hungry. Don’t suppress it; don’t force it not to be hungry. It is hungry. You know, but at the same time say to it, “I am not going to fulfill this hunger today. Be hungry, suffer. Now, today, I am not going to move in this supplied groove. I will remain aloof.”
Suddenly, if you can do this, you begin to feel a gap. The body is hungry, but somewhere there is a distance between you and it. If you try to occupy your mind then you have missed the point. If you go to the temple and begin to do kirtan and sing just to forget the hunger, then you have missed the point. Let the body be hungry. Don’t occupy your mind to escape from hunger. Remain hungry, but just tell the body, “Today I am not going to fall in the trap.” You remain hungry, you suffer.
There are persons who are doing fasts, but meaninglessly, because whenever they fast they try to occupy the mind so that the hunger should not be known and should not be felt. If the hunger is not felt, the whole point is missed. Then you are playing tricks. Let the hunger be there in its totality, in its intensity. Let it be there; don’t escape from it. Let the fact of it be there, present. Remain aloof and tell the body, “Today I am not going to give you anything.” There is neither conflict nor suppression nor any escape.
If you can do this, then suddenly you become aware of a gap. Your mind asks for something: for example, someone has become angry, he is angry with you, and the mind begins to react, to be angry. Just tell the mind, “I am not going to fall in the trap this time.” Be aloof. Let the anger be there in the mind, but be aloof. Don’t cooperate, don’t be identified, and you will feel that the anger is somewhere else. It surrounds you, but it is not in you, it doesn’t belong to you. It is just like smoke around you. It goes on, goes on, and waits for you to come and cooperate.
There will be every temptation. This is what is really meant by temptation – mm? No devil is there to tempt you, your own mind tempts you, because that’s the most convenient way to be and to behave. Convenience is the temptation; convenience is the devil. The mind will say, “Be angry!” The situation is there and the mechanism is just on. Always, whenever this situation was there you have been angry, so the mind supplies you again with the same reaction.
As far as it goes it is good, because mind makes you ready to do something you have always been doing. But sometimes just stand off, off the track, and tell the mind, “Okay, anger is there outside. Someone is angry with me. You are supplying me with an old reaction, a stereotyped reaction, but this time I am not going to cooperate. I will just stand here and observe and see what happens.” Suddenly the whole situation changes.
If you don’t cooperate the mind falls dead, because it is your cooperation which gives it dynamism, energy. It is your energy, but you only become aware when it is used by the mind – don’t give it, and the mind will just fall down as if without a backbone, just a dead snake with no life. It will be there, and for the first time you will become aware of a certain energy in you which doesn’t belong to the mind but belongs to you.
This energy is pure energy, and with this energy one can move into the unknown. In fact, this energy moves into the unknown if it is not associated with the mind. If it is associated with the mind, then it moves into the known. If it moves into the known, then it takes the shape of desire. If it moves into the unknown, then it takes the shape of desirelessness. Then there is sheer movement – a play of energy, a sheer dance of energy, an overflowing energy moving into the unknown.
Mind can only supply the known, and if you can be detached from your mind, this energy will have to move, because it can-not remain static. That is what is meant by energy: it has to move! Movement is its very life. Movement is not a quality of energy, movement is the very life. It is not that energy cannot be without movement – no. It is the very life, intrinsic.
Energy means movement, so it moves. If mind supplies it with grooves, then it moves into the grooves. If there is no supply of grooves and if you have just put off the mind, then too it moves, but now the movement is into the uncharted. This movement is the play, the leela, this movement is creative, this movement is spiritual, and it is desireless. It is not because there is some desire that you move. It is because you cannot do anything else but move: you are energy and movement. So see the difference.
When mind works, it works as a dead weight, a mechanical weight, through the past. It pushes you towards the future.…Because the past is pushing towards the future, the past again projects its own desires. So first understand the repetitiveness of desires.
There are not so many desires. Really, there are very few, you go on repeating them. Just count how many desires you have. They are not many – very few. You will not even be able to find enough to count on your fingers. How many desires do you have? Very few! Really, if you look deeply, you may even find that there is only one desire. There are modifications of it, but really only one desire, and the same desire is being repeated continuously. Life after life it is being repeated. You go on repeating and then it begins to seem, it begins to appear, that you are helpless, that the wheel is moving and you cannot do anything. It is not so. You are helpless only because you have forgotten totally that the energy by which the wheel is moving is given by you.
The future is just a repetition because of the past. It is the projected past. You desire the same thing again, and you go on again and again. That’s why I said that past and future are parts of mind, not parts of time. Time is just here and now, the present. If mind is not working, then energy will be here and now, in the moment. lt will move because it is energy, but now the movement will be into the unknown. The “known” is not there at all. Mind is not, so the known is not.

Someone asked Hui-Hai, “How did you achieve? How did you attain?”
Hui-Hai said, “When I became a no-mind then I achieved, then I attained.”

We are minds. That means, tethered to the past. If we can become no-minds, that means untethered to the past. Then the moment is free, fresh, and energy moves – not for something but because it is energy. Remember the difference exactly: it moves not for something; it moves because it is energy.
A river is moving; ordinarily we think it is moving for the sea. How can it know? It is not moving for the sea, it is moving because it is energy. Ultimately, the sea happens to be there; that is another thing. So when you move into the unknown, ultimately you reach to the divine – it happens to be there. If your movement is pure, you reach it.
The river goes on moving without knowing, without any map. The past cannot supply the map because the river is not going to move on the past tracks again, so every step is into the unknown and where it is going there is no way to know. It is not moving because of any desire, it is not moving for something. The future is unknown – just unknown, dark. It moves. Why does it move? It moves because it is energy.
A seed is moving, a tree is growing, stars are moving. Why do they move? Have they to reach somewhere? – no. They move because they are energy; pure energy is moving. Because pure energy cannot do anything else, it moves. So when you become just pure energy – not mind, but no-mind energy – you move; and then every step is just into the unknown. Then life becomes a bliss, it becomes ecstatic, because the old is never repeated again. Never again will the morning be the same, never again this moment. Now it is a sensation, a thrill every time. This thrill creates Meera’s dance; this thrill creates Chaitanya’s singing; with this thrill, every moment something new is bursting, exploding. A buddha is never bored. He looks fresh.

Maulingaputta came to Buddha. He was a very inquiring young man, a great scholar, one who knew all that can be known from scriptures, a great pundit. When he came to Buddha he began to ask many questions. The second day again he asked many questions. The third day again he asked many questions. Ananda, another disciple of Buddha’s, was just bored. He asked Buddha, “Are you not bored? He is repeating the same questions again and again.”
Buddha asked Ananda, “Has he repeated? Has he repeated a single question?”
Every moment is so new for a buddha-conscious mind. For a buddha-like mind everything is so new, how can you repeat the old question again? Even the questioner does not remain the same. How can you ask the same question you asked yesterday? The Ganges has flowed so much, so how can you ask the same question again? You will never be the same again yourself.
Buddha said, “Even if he is asking the same questions he is not asking the same person. So how can I say he is repeating? He must have asked someone else. Yesterday where was I? The energy has moved.”
Someone was very angry, insulted Buddha; then felt sorry, and the next day came to ask Buddha’s forgiveness. Buddha was just bewildered, and he said, “You are a strange man! You insult one person, and then you ask pardon from somebody else.”
The man said, “What are you saying? Am I strange, or are you strange? I came yesterday and insulted you. I felt very sorry, and I couldn’t sleep.”
Buddha said, “That’s why you are still repeating. But I could sleep and now I am a different man. The river has gone on and it is not again the same bank; I will never be the same, so now you are in difficulty because you cannot ask pardon of a man you will never meet. If I ever meet him I will tell him whatsoever you have said to me.”

This energy moving into the unknown is fresh, young, so a buddha can never be old. The body, of course, will become old, but a buddha can never be old. He will remain young. That’s why we have never pictured Rama, Krishna or Buddha as old. They became old, but we have no pictures of Krishna’s old age, of Rama’s old age, of Buddha’s old age, of Mahavira’s old age. We have no pictures.
It is not that they never became old – the body has to follow the common lot – but by not creating pictures of their old age something more is meant. Really, they were never old because they were so moving – so moving and so young. For such persons death is not an end, it is again a further movement. It is not an end at all.
So mind is not dynamic; mind is mechanical. It can become dynamic if you cooperate with it. Don’t cooperate with it! Remember your aloofness, create a distance. Be aware, and then the mind will be there but you will be outside.
The English word ecstasy is very beautiful and meaningful. You may not have even conceived of what this word means – ecstasy. It means “to stand outside,” the word means to stand outside. If you can stand outside of yourself, if you can be outside of yourself, you are in ecstasy. Someone has suggested that to translate samadhi as “ecstasy” is not good because the word samadhi doesn’t mean to stand outside. Really, samadhi means to stand inside. So someone has suggested a new word, he has coined a new word. Instead of ecstasy he says it is better to translate samadhi as “instasy” – to stand inside.
Really, these two words mean two different things, but in a certain way they mean the same. If you can stand out of your mind, then you will be able to stand in your Self. If you can stand outside yourself – the so-called self – then you will be, for the first time, inside. So ecstasy is “instasy.” Then you will be in your center.
If you are out of your mind, then you will be centered in your Self. So going out of the mind is going into consciousness. That’s why mind has to be understood as mechanical, as a mechanism, as accumulation, as the past. Once you feel it, you are out of it, but we go on, we continue to identify ourselves with it.
Whenever you say, “This is my thought,” you are identifying. Change the language – and sometimes it helps very much if you can just change the language. Language has such a deep grip. Say, “This belongs to my past mind,” and feel the difference. When you say, “This is my thought,” you are identified. Say, “This belongs to my mind, my past mind,” and feel how only a change of language creates a distance.
For example, we say, “My mind is tense.” Then you are identified. We even say, “I am tense.” Then there is even more identification. When you say, “I am tense,” there is no gap. When you say, “My mind is tense,” there is a little gap. If you can say, “I am aware that the mind is tense,” then there is a greater gap. The greater the gap, the less will be the tension.
When we say, “I am tense,” it looks as if someone else is responsible. So psychology suggests never to say “I am tense,” because subtly it makes someone else responsible. They say that rather than to say “I am tense,” one should say, “I am tensing.” Then the responsibility is yours.
So break the old habits of language, mind, thoughts, and then your energy will move. Once the mind is not there, you are free for the first time.

Osho,
There is a story in the life of Paramahansa Ramakrishna, and we have heard it from you more than once, about his lust for food which Sharada Devi told about.
Doesn't it indicate that desire is intrinsically related to living, to life itself?
Desire is related with life, but life can be desireless also. But then bodily life will become impossible. Really, desire is the link between life and body. If all the desires drop, then the body cannot continue anymore because body is just an instrumentality for desires to be fulfilled. Now biologists say that we have developed the senses because of desires, and if you can desire persistently, then your body will develop new senses.
It is only because of desires that we have eyes. Ordinarily we think that because there are eyes we see. No! Biologists say that because there is a desire to see, eyes develop. If the desire is not there to see, then eyes will just drop. The whole body comes into existence because of desires.
Buddha lived for forty years after his enlightenment, so there was a question: If desires have stopped totally, then Buddha must die – how is he alive?
The body has a momentum. If you are running and want to stop suddenly, you cannot stop. Your mind has stopped, you have decided to stop, but you will have to run a little more because of the momentum. You have been pedaling a bicycle, and now you have stopped pedaling but the wheels have accumulated momentum. They will run on, and it will take a little more time for the bicycle to stop completely. That’s why I always say that if the bicycle is going uphill, then it will soon stop. If you have stopped pedaling and the bicycle is going uphill, then it will soon stop. It may even stop the same moment you stop pedaling. But if it is going downhill, it may go on much longer.
So if enlightenment happens before the age of thirty-five the body may die soon. If it happens after thirty-five, then it is downhill, it may continue more. So a Shankara soon dies. He was just thirty-three, and he became enlightened at the age of twenty – so it was rare. And he had to die. He couldn’t complete the thirty-fifth year, he couldn’t reach even to the middle. If the enlightenment happens after thirty-five then you are downhill, then the body can continue.
With desires stopping totally, really you have stopped being a body. Now the old momentum will work, and it will depend on many things.
Buddha died because of food poisoning, and he could not be cured; not because the food poisoning was so dangerous – it was very ordinary – but he had no bodily link, so he couldn’t be helped. So now medicine accepts this: that if you have a lust for life, medicines will he more helpful. If you don’t have any lust for life, then medicines may not prove helpful at all.
So now there are many experiments. Two persons are ill, just on their deathbeds. One is more serious, and there is no hope for him – but he is hopeful and he wants to live longer. Medical science is not hopeful, doctors are not hopeful, but he himself is hopeful. Another is not in such a serious state. Everyone is just hopeful: “He will survive; there is no problem.” But he himself is hopeless. He doesn’t want to survive. Suddenly, inside, something has dropped from the body. Now medicine cannot help, he will die – and the seriously ill man will survive. Medicine can help him.
Body and consciousness are related by desires. That’s why, if a person dies without desire, then he will not be reborn; because now there is no necessity, no causality to create a body again.
I have seen one person who cannot go to sleep because he is fearful of death. Death may occur in sleep, then what can he do? So he is afraid, he cannot sleep. I think his fear is valid, his fear has a significance – because he has no desire to live. He is not desireless, he just has no desire to live. Rather, he has a desire to die, and if a person has a desire to die, he can die in sleep very easily.
You can get up in the morning again, not only because the morning has come, but because you have something which forces you to get up. This person has nothing; nothing forces him to get up. So he cannot sleep because of the fear, and in the morning he doesn’t feel at all like getting up. There is nothing. Still, I say, he is not desireless. He is just frustrated; all his desires have become frustrations. When all desires are frustrated you create a new desire – a desire to die.
Freud, in his old age, stumbled upon a new thing of which he had never dreamed. For his whole life he worked on “libido” – the desire to live. He based his whole structure of thinking on this force of libido – this sex, this desire for life – and in the end he stumbled upon a second desire. The first desire he calls “Eros” and the second he calls “Thanatos.” Thanatos means the death wish, a desire to die. Freud began to feel that if there is no desire to die, how can a man die? There must be hidden somewhere a desire to die; otherwise, biologists say that the body itself can continue – even forever. There is no necessary reason why a man should die so soon, because the body has a built-in process to renew itself. It can continue renewing – but there are many things….
The body is born, as we have always said, because of some desire to live, mm? Really, Freud is right. A second desire is needed to complete the circle. A desire to die must be hidden there. That death-desire helps you to die, and the life-desire helps you to be reborn. That death-desire comes many times to everyone. Many times you become suddenly aware of it. Whenever something is frustrated – you have lost a lover or beloved – suddenly the death-desire comes up and you want to die. Not because you have become desireless, but because your most longed-for desire is now impossible. So you begin to desire death.
This difference has to be noted, because many religious persons are really not religious, they are only desiring death, they are suicidal. It is very easy to change the desire from life to death. It is very easy, because life and death are not just two things, they are two aspects of one phenomenon, so you can change.
So it happens that the persons who commit suicide are really those who are very, very deeply attached to life…because they are so much attached to life, whenever they are frustrated they cannot do anything else but commit suicide. A person who is not too much attached to life cannot commit suicide. Suicides can be committed in two ways: they can be long-term and they can be short-term. You can take poison just now, or you can go on dying slowly for many years. It depends how much courage you have.
Sometimes it happens that you have no courage to live and you have no courage to die, then you have to die slowly. Then a long-term suicide is chosen. Then one just goes on dropping by and by – dying, dying, dying. Then death is a long, delayed process – by degrees.
This death wish is also there, and there are many things, many implications in it. Bernard Shaw, in his later life, left city life and went to live in a small village. Someone asked him, “Why have you chosen this village?”
He said. “I was just passing by the cemetery and I came upon a stone on which it was written: ‘This man died at the age of one hundred and ten – the death was untimely.’ So I thought this village is worth living in. If people here think that one hundred and ten is untimely, then it is good to be here.” And, really, he lived very long.
Psychologists say it is a fixation. If the whole country thinks that seventy is the maximum, then it becomes a fixed mind-attitude. If the country thinks that one hundred is the maximum, then one hundred will become the maximum. If the country begins to think as a whole, collectively, that there is no need to die so soon and that a man can live three hundred years, if the whole country becomes fixed with three hundred years as the maximum, then the body can live for three hundred years. It is just a collective hypnosis.
We know a person is going to be old at a particular age, everyone knows. The child becomes aware of when one becomes old. The young man knows when youth will be gone. Everyone knows. And it is so repeatedly known, it is so suggestive, that everyone knows that seventy, or eighty at the maximum, is going to be the limit. We die at eighty because we believe that eighty is the limit; if you can change the limit, there is no need! Basically, there is no need for the body to die so soon. It is a self-regenerating process. It goes on regenerating, it can continue.
This collective hypnosis and the death wish become conjoined, they both become one. But if life needs desires, then death also needs desires. That is why we never say that Krishna died – never. We say that he entered samadhi. We never say Buddha died – mm? – it was nirvana, deliverance. We never say that they died because, really, for them, how can death be possible when life has become impossible? Understand the implication: if life has become an impossibility for a buddha, then how can death be possible? A person who cannot desire life, how can he desire death? If he has become so desireless that life is impossible, then death will also be impossible. So we never say that a buddha dies. We say only that he enters a greater life. We never say that he dies.
How is it that we die? We die because we live, because we are attached to life. We have to be detached from life, broken. When a buddha lives, he lives as a momentum. He is in the car, and the car is going downhill. Wherever it stops, he will not have any grudge – wherever. At the very moment the car stops he will get down. Not for a single moment will he feel something wrong. He will not feel anything is wrong; it is as it should be. He can live as if not living; he can die as if not dying. But if you want to continue, then some desire has to be there.
Ramakrishna tried to be alive for some time just to give the message to a right person. He felt that if there was no desire left and no momentum either, then the body would just drop. So he cultivated, he created, he forced a desire to be there. He continuously tried that at least one desire would be alive until the moment he could deliver the message to a right person. It never happened to a Buddha; it never happened to a Mahavira. Why did it happen to Ramakrishna? Really, it is not a question of why it happened to Ramakrishna. It is a question concerned not with Ramakrishna, but with our age.
At Buddha’s time it was never impossible to find persons – never. There were so many, and at any moment the message could be delivered to anyone. But for Ramakrishna it was such an impossibility to find a person. So for the first time Ramakrishna alone is the man, in the whole history of mankind, who tried forcibly to be alive a little more – just to get the right man.
When Vivekananda came to him for the first time Ramakrishna said, “Where have you been? I have waited so long. I have waited so long!” And when Vivekananda for the first time achieved the first glimpse of samadhi, Ramakrishna stopped him. He said, “Now no more, because then you will also have the same difficulty. So just remain here, don’t go further. Just remain here until the message is delivered. Now I will take your keys with me so you will not have to suffer the same as I have suffered. First I achieved something, then I had to be rooted in the earth and it was very difficult, very difficult. So now I will take your keys with me, and these keys will be given to you only before your death – three days before.”
Vivekananda remained without having the glimpse again. Then he couldn’t achieve. This happening, what Ramakrishna had said, became the barrier. He couldn’t cross the barrier. He crossed only before his death – three days before.
Life is desire – mm? The life we know is desire. But there is another life which is desirelessness – the life we don’t know. This life is through body; that life is through pure consciousness – direct, immediate. This life is through body, through mind, through instruments. That’s why it is so dim and faint. It is not an immediate thing.
When something reaches you through many mediums it is distorted. It is bound to be. You have never seen the light. Your eyes see the light, then the light is transformed into chemicals, into electric waves. You have never seen those electric waves, you have never seen those chemicals. Those chemicals carry the message, then they are decoded in your mind. They are just codes. Then they are decoded, and the mind gives you the message that you have seen the light. Then you begin to say, “I have seen the light; the sun has risen.” You have never seen the sun rising. It is just a chemical process that reaches you, never the sunrise. It is only the picture that is again decoded.
Our whole experience is like this – indirect. I touch the hand of my beloved, of my lover, of my friend. I have never touched them, I cannot, because touch remains at my fingertips. Then, just through my system, an electric wave comes to my mind. That wave is decoded and I say, “How beautiful.” This touch can be created if my eyes are closed. This touch can be created by a mechanical device, and if the same wave frequency can be created as is created by my beloved’s touch, I will say, “How beautiful.”
No touch is even needed if the message-carrying system in the mind can be stimulated by an electrode. Again I will feel, “How beautiful.” Just an electrode can be put in your skull, and if we know what the frequencies of your experiences are – when you feel love, what frequency waves you receive – then we can push the buttons and the same frequency is created by the electrode in the mind and you begin to be in love. What frequency do you receive when you interpret it as anger? The electrode can create the same frequency, and you will begin to be angry.
What are you living in life? What have you known? You have known nothing, because everything is through so many mediums that only an indirect message reaches you.
There is another life without the body, without the mind. Then the experience is immediate, without any medium. It is direct, there is nothing in between. If the light is there, there is nothing in between, then for the first time you are filled with light, not with a coded message. That experience is the experience of the divine.
I can say it in this way: if you are experiencing existence through mediums, it is the world. If you are experiencing the existence without any mediums, it is the divine. That which is experienced is the same: only the experiencer is experiencing in different ways.
One way is through something else. I give you a message, then you give it to somebody else, then he to somebody else. Then it reaches to whomsoever it was to be given – to whom it may concern. Then it reaches – and it has changed. Every time it is given to someone it is changed. With our eyes we don’t see alike. We cannot see alike because in a subtle way every instrument is different. So when I see light I feel it in a different way. When you see light you feel it in a different way.
When a van Gogh sees the sun, certainly he sees it in a different way because he will become just mad, begin to dance, cry, scream. He will just be mad when he sees the sun. For one year van Gogh continually painted only sun pictures. He would not sleep; he was just mad. And in Arles, where the sun is very hot, for one year continuously the sun was beating down on his head and he was in the field painting – painting for one year continuously. He went mad. For one year he had to be put in a madhouse, and the only reason was that he couldn’t stand so much sun.
But no one goes so mad. He committed suicide and he wrote a letter, and in the letter he had written, “Now there is no need to live because I have painted all the faces of the sun. I have painted all the faces possible. I have known the sun in every mood, now there is no need to live. Now I can drop dead.” Certainly he must have seen the sun in a different way. No one goes so mad after the sun. Why this madness?
He must have had a different message system. Now psychologists say he must have had some different chemicals, built-in chemicals. It is possible that soon we will come to a conclusion that poets have a different quantity of certain chemicals, and only because of that do they begin to be mad after flowers, after clouds. For all others it is just nonsense. It is okay that there is a flower, but it is nonsense to go on painting it, creating poetries and living for it. Certainly something like LSD must be a built-in chemical with them. A dancer has a different chemistry. It seems that the bioenergy works in a different way.
So when I say that life is bound with desires, I mean this life, not that. This life is bound with desires. So the more desires you have, the more you will have the feeling of this life, mm? That’s why those who are after desires, running and running, seem to us to be very much alive; we say they are very much alive. What are you doing? Run! Everyone is running and everyone is so alive. Are you just dead?
But there is another life also – greater, deeper, more vital, more immediate and direct. We have a word for it, aparokshanubhuti – immediate experiencing. God must be seen, but not by eyes. He must be heard, but not by ears. He must be embraced, but not by hands, not by the body. But how can it happen?
We know only two things: life of desires and death of desires. We don’t know another dimension: desireless life and desireless liberation. But if we become aware of the very mechanism of desire we can create a gap, and the moment the gap is created, life begins to move into another life.

Osho,
With growing desirelessness, sometimes the person becomes outwardly inactive.
Is it lethargy and dullness? Why does it happen?
Many things are possible, and it will depend. Certainly many desires will drop and many actions also. Those actions which were just caused by desires will drop. If I was running for a particular desire, how can I run if the desire has dropped? My running will stop. At least the same running on the same route will stop. So when a person becomes desireless, at least for an interim period, for an interval – and how long it will be will depend on the individual – he will become inactive. The desires will have dropped, and all the actions that he had been doing were concerned with desires, so how can he continue? They will drop.
But by dropping desires and actions, energy will be accumulated, and now energy will begin to move. When it moves, how it moves will vary from individual to individual, but now it will move. There will be a gap, an interim period, an interval. This I call a pregnancy period. The seed is born, but now it will gestate for at least nine months. It may seem strange, but it happens. This nine months period is meaningful. Nearabout this, eight months or ten months, will be the interim period, and you will just become inactive. This inactivity will also vary. Someone may become so inactive that people may think that he has just gone into a coma. Everything stops.
It happened like that for Meher Baba. For one year he was just in a coma. He couldn’t even move his limbs. Action was far off, he couldn’t stand up because even the desire to stand had gone. He couldn’t eat, he had to be forced. He couldn’t do anything. For one year continuously he became just helpless – a helpless child. This was a pregnancy period, and then suddenly a different man was born. The man who became inactive was no more. A new energy – energy accumulated.
Lives and lives of dissipated energy create this gap – because you do not have enough energy. When desire is not there to invoke, provoke, stimulate, you just drop. Your energy is not really energy, but just a pushing and pulling. Anyhow, you go on running because the goal seems just nearby. A few moments’ endeavor more and you will reach. You pull yourself on; somehow you carry yourself and run. But when the goal is dropped, when there is no desire, you will drop. An inactivity will be there. If you can be patient in this inactivity period, after it you will be reborn. Then energy will begin to move without desires.
But I say it depends. It may happen suddenly as it happened for Meher Baba: that was a sudden case. It happened in Bombay. It happened by a kiss from an old lady, Babajan. Meher Baba was just passing, coming back from his school. Babajan was an old Sufi mystic, an old lady who was just sitting under a tree for years and years and years. Meher Baba was just coming, and Babajan called him. He knew this old lady. She was sitting for years under the tree, and he had passed by that street daily on his way towards his school and towards his home. She called and he came near. She kissed him, and he dropped as if dead, just there. Then he had to be carried home.
For one year continuously the kiss remained on him and he was in a coma. It may happen suddenly like this – mm? This was a great transfer, and Babajan died afterwards because she had just been waiting for this moment to give someone the whole energy. This was her last life, and there was not enough time even to explain what she was giving. Also, she was not the type to have explained, she was a silent mystic. She had not touched anybody for years. She was only waiting for this moment when she was to kiss someone, and the whole energy was to be transferred in a single transfer. Before this she had not even touched anyone, so this touch was to be total.
This child was simply unaware of what was going to happen. He was ready – otherwise this transfer would not have been possible – but he was not aware. He had worked through his past lives. He was just coming up. He might have become aware later on, but just now he was completely unaware. This happened so suddenly that he had to go again through a second pregnancy. For one year he was as if not. Many medicines were given, many, many doctors and physicians tried to help, but nothing could be done, and the woman who could do something, she disappeared, she died. After one year he was a different man – totally different.
If it happens so suddenly, then it will be a deep coma. If it happens through some exercises, then it will never be so deep a coma. If you are doing awareness exercises, meditation, then it will never happen so suddenly. It will come so gradually, so gradually, that you will never even become aware of when it has happened. By and by, inactivity will be there, activity will be there, and very gradually everything inside will change. The desire will drop, the activity will drop, but no one will ever feel that you have been lethargic or that you have become inactive.
This is the gradual process. So those who follow yoga or any method will not feel the suddenness. There are also methods in which sudden happenings become possible, but one can be prepared. Babajan never prepared this boy, she never even asked his permission. It was a one-way affair. She just transferred the energy.
Zen monks also transfer, but before transferring they prepare the ground. A person can be made ready to receive the energy, then this reaction will not be there. He may feel lethargy for some days, for some months, but no one will feel outside that inside everything has become inactive. But that needs preparation and that can happen only in schools, and when I say “school,” I mean a group, working.
Babajan was alone, she never made anyone her disciple. There was no school, there was not a following in which she could have prepared anyone. Also, she was not the type. She was not the teacher type; she couldn’t teach. But she had to give to someone, to whomsoever passed and she felt: “Now is the moment, and this one will be able to carry it,” so she could just deliver it.
So it depends. Inactivity is bound to be there – more or less; but it will be there, a period will be there. Only then can you be reborn because the whole mechanism has to change completely. The mind drops, old roots drop, the old habits drop, the old association of consciousness and desires, consciousness and mind, drops – everything old drops and everything has to be new.
A waiting is needed, patience is needed, and if one is patient, one has not to do anything. Just to wait is enough. The energy begins to move by itself. You just sow the seed and then wait. Don’t be in a hurry, don’t go every day to pull the seed out and see what is happening. Just put it inside and wait, the energy will take its own course. The seed will die, and the energy will sprout and will begin to move. But don’t be impatient. One has to wait.
The greater the seed, the greater the possibility, the potentiality, of the tree that is going to be, the more will be the waiting. But it comes. It comes! The deeper the waiting, the sooner it comes.

============================================================

Nischal gyanam asanam

Nonwavering knowing
is asana – the posture.
Man is neither a body nor a mind alone – he is both. Even to say that he is both is wrong in a way because body and mind are separate only as two words. Existence is one. Body is nothing but the outermost core of your consciousness, the grossest expression of consciousness, and consciousness, on the other hand, is nothing more than the subtlest body, the most refined part of the body. You exist in between.
These are not two things, but two ends of one thing. So whenever knowing becomes nonwavering, the body is also affected; nonwavering knowing creates a nonwavering body. But vice versa is not true. You can impose nonwavering on the body, but the knowing will not become nonwavering. It can help – a very little. It can be helpful, but not much.
Body posture became very important because we are body-oriented. Even those who say that we are not bodies think in terms of body. Even those who say, “We are not bodies,” their thinking, their mind, remains tethered to the body. Even they begin with body postures. Asana means giving your body a posture in which the body becomes nonwavering, still. It is supposed that if the body is still, then the mind will go into stillness.
This is not true – the contrary is true. If the mind becomes still, then the body becomes still. And then a very mysterious phenomenon happens: if the mind is still, you can go on dancing but your body will remain still. If your mind is not still, you can be just dead but still the body will be wavering, because the mind wavering creates subtle vibrations which come to the body and the body goes on wavering inside. Try it: you can sit just like a statue – dead, stone-like. Close your eyes and feel. Outwardly, no one can say that your body is wavering, but inwardly you will know that it is. A subtle trembling is there. Even if it cannot be detected from the outside you can feel it from the inside.
If your mind is totally still, then even if you are dancing you will feel from inside that the body is still. A buddha is still even when he is walking, and a non-buddha is not still even when he is dead. The vibrations come from your center, they originate from you, and then they spread towards the body. The body is not the originator, it is not the source, so you cannot stop them from the periphery. You can impose, you can practice, but inside there will be turmoil – and this imposing will create more conflict than stillness.
So this sutra says that to practice meditation, a posture, a still posture, is needed. But what do we mean by a posture? This sutra says that a nonwavering knowing is the posture. If the mind is nonwavering, then you are in the right posture. In that right posture everything can happen.
So don’t deceive yourself by creating bodily imitations. You can create them; that is very easy. To impose stillness on the circumference, on the periphery, is very easy, but that is not your stillness. You remain in turmoil, you remain wavering. It is from the center that the waves must not come.
What is this nonwavering knowledge? It is one of the deepest secrets. To understand it we will have to go deep into the very construction of mind, so let us begin.
Mind has many types of thoughts. Every thought is a wavering, every thought is a wave. If there are no thoughts, then the mind will be nonwavering. A single thought, and you have trembled. A single thought, and you are not still. And a single thought is not a single thought, it is a very complex phenomenon. A single thought is created by many waves; even a single word is created by many waves. So only when there are many waves in the mind is a single word created, and a single thought has many words. Thousands and thousands of ripples create one thought.
Thought is the outermost, but waves have preceded. You become aware only when waves become thoughts because your awareness is so gross. You cannot be aware when waves are pure waves, still in the formation of becoming a thought. The more you will become aware, the more you will feel that thought has many layers. The thought form is the last. Before thought there are seed waves which create the thought, and before the seed waves there are still deeper roots which create seeds.
Seeds create thought. At least three layers are very easily visible for a conscious mind. But we are not conscious, we are asleep. So we become aware only when waves take the grossest form – thought. As far as we know, thought seems to be the most subtle thing. It is not. Thought really has become a thing. When there are pure waves you cannot even detect what is going to happen, what thought is going to be created in you. So we become aware only when waves become thought.
A single thought implies thousands of waves, so we can conceive how much we are wavering – continuous thinking, not a single moment of no thought, one thought followed by another constantly, no gap. So we are really a wavering phenomenon, a trembling phenomenon. Søren Kierkegaard has said that man is a trembling – just a trembling and nothing else. He is right in a way. As far as we are concerned, man is a trembling. A Buddha may not be, but then Buddha is not a man.
This thought process is the process of wavering. So non-wavering means a no-thought state of mind. Really, the sutra says nonwavering knowing – mind is not even mentioned. So, first, three layers of mind have to be distinctly understood.
One is the conscious mind, and one type of thought belongs to the conscious level. These thoughts are the least important. They constitute moment-to-moment reactions, reflexes. You are on the road and a snake passes and you jump. The snake gives you a stimulus, and you respond. So one type of thought is like this: stimulus outside and a response from the periphery. Really, you don’t think, you just act. A snake is there, you act; you become aware and you act. You don’t go inside to ask what to do. The house is on fire and you run. This is a peripheral reaction.
So one type of thought is the moment-to-moment reflex type. Even a buddha has to react in this way. This is natural; nothing is wrong with it. If you react moment to moment, then nothing is wrong with the mind – but that is not the only layer.
Then there is a second layer. This second layer is the subconscious. Religions call it “conscience.” Really, this second layer is created by the society; it is a society in you. Society penetrates everyone, because society cannot control you unless it penetrates you; so it becomes a part of you. The upbringing, the education, the parents, the teachers – what are they doing? They are doing one thing: they are creating the subconscious mind. They are giving you thoughts, structures, ideals, values. These thoughts belong to the second layer. They are helpful, they have their utility, but they are harmful also. They are instruments to move easily, conveniently in the society, but they are barriers also.
This second layer has to be understood more. This second layer consists of ideas within – fixed ideas, fixations. So whenever your peripheral mind is working moment to moment it is not pure. Only a child is pure, innocent – he is working moment to moment. There is no subconscious to interfere.
You are not working moment to moment, the subconscious is constantly interfering. It is giving you choice: what to choose, what not to choose. Every moment it is making you narrow. You just become unaware of many things because of the subconscious. It will not allow you to be aware of everything. And about many things you become too much aware because this subconscious mind forces you constantly to be aware of them.
Every society creates a different type of subconscious, so really being a Hindu or a Christian or a Jaina belongs to the subconscious mind. As far as the peripheral mind is concerned, everyone reacts in the same way; it is natural. But the subconscious mind is not natural, it is a social product, so we behave in different ways. You see a church. A Hindu can pass it without even becoming aware that there is a church. He need not be aware. But a Christian cannot pass without becoming aware that there is a church. He may even be anti-Christian – consciously he may even be like Bertrand Russell, who can write a book called Why I Am Not a Christian – but he will become aware. The subconscious is working there.
A brahmin, he can intellectually understand that the problem of untouchability is just violent, cruel, and intellectually he can think that it is not good, but this is the conscious mind. The subconscious is working there. If you ask him to marry a sudra girl, he is struck somewhere deeply. He cannot conceive of it. Even to eat with an untouchable becomes difficult. Intellectually he understands nothing is wrong in it, but the subconscious goes on projecting and pushing. And he cannot react naturally: the subconscious distorts, perverts.
This subconscious is constantly supplying you with many ideas which you think are your own. They are not. They have been fed to you just like a computer is fed. You can get information out of a computer only if you have previously fed it. The same is also the case with man, with mind also. Whatsoever you are getting out is just because of what has been fed in before. Everything has been fed in. This is what we mean by education, the so-called education – feeding information, so it is ready in the unconscious every moment. It is so ready, really, that even when you don’t need it, it comes up. It constantly overfloods your mind and it becomes a constant wavering, a constant trembling. This subconscious mind is the root cause of so many social evils.
Really, the world could be one if there was no subconscious mind. Then there would be no distinction between a Hindu and a Mohammedan. The distinction is of the subconscious feeding, and it goes so deep that you cannot even feel how it works. You cannot go behind it. It goes so deep that you always remain in front and you feel helpless. But the society is also helpless. It is a substitute – a poor substitute, but a substitute. Unless man becomes totally aware, the society cannot dispense with the subconscious.
For example, if a man becomes totally aware he cannot be a thief. But man, as he is, is not aware at all, so society has to create a substitute for awareness, it must put a strong suggestion inside that theft is bad, evil, sin; that you must not be a thief. This idea must be put deep in the subconscious so that when you begin to think of theft the subconscious comes up and says, “No, this is sin,” and you are stopped. This is a social substitute for awareness, and unless man comes to awareness the society cannot dispense with the subconscious because it has to give you some rules. Unless you are so aware that rules are not needed at all the subconscious will have to be maintained.
So each society has to create a subconscious. I call that society good – remember it – I call that society good which creates a subconscious that can be dispensed with very easily. And I call a society bad which creates such a subconscious that it cannot be dispensed with – because if it cannot be dispensed with, then it becomes a hindrance when you try to be aware. And, really, now no such good society exists which gives you a dispensable substitute, a dispensable subconscious, which gives you a subconscious as a utilitarian instrument so that the moment you become aware you can throw it away.
To me, the society which gives you an inherent freedom about the subconscious is good and religious. But no society gives it, so no society is really religious. Every society is totalitarian, and every society takes your mind in such a way that you become just an automaton – and you go on thinking and deceiving yourself that your thoughts are yours. They are not! Even the very language we use is contaminated, the words we use are contaminated. We cannot use a single word without the subconscious being there. It comes suddenly. Society uses it very cunningly, and then your reactions, your reflexes, are not spontaneous.
You are passing along the road and in the distance you see a woman coming out of a shop. Your mind begins to feel and say that she is beautiful, and then suddenly you recognize that the woman is your sister. Now, suddenly, she is not a woman at all. What has happened? The word “sister’ has come in. Now she is not a woman at all. And with the word ‘sister’ the subconscious has many, many deep associations. Suddenly something has happened. What has happened? The woman is not a woman now, because a sister is not a woman. How can a sister be a woman? Nothing has changed outwardly, but a word has dropped in.
Then you recognize that you were deceived by the dress, she is not your sister. Again something else comes up: she is not your sister! Now she again becomes beautiful. How can a sister be beautiful? And when you say beautiful, you mean now you are sexually interested. Now she can potentially be a sexual object. The possibility grows.
Even the words we use are loaded with the subconscious. That is why, in the hospitals, for nurses we use the word sister – just so that they cannot be made objects for sexual interest. Otherwise it will be difficult for them and more difficult for the patients. Nurses are constantly moving here and there. If they constantly become sexual objects, then it will be very difficult for the patients also. So we just play a trick: we call them sisters. The moment they are sisters they are not women. The very word is loaded.
This subconscious mind is constantly working, day and night. The mind’s working is double. One working belongs to your conscious mind. It is concerned with how to control the subconscious consciously, constantly. Then the subconscious is controlling the conscious mind. It is working to control your reactions, your actions, your reflexes, everything; whatsoever you are doing must be controlled. This is the society’s grip on you. You are just moving in society’s hands. No value is yours. How can it be? How can a value be yours when you are not at all aware? Only awareness can give you authentic, individual values.
All these values are supplied. If the society is vegetarian, then you have vegetarian values. If the society is nonvegetarian, then you have nonvegetarian values. If the society believes in this, then you are a believer in it. If the society doesn’t believe, then you are a disbeliever. But you are not; only society is there.
This is a double control: one control is on your conscious mind, your behavior. Another control is more deep and more dangerous, and that is the control on your instinctive nature. The first part is conscious, the second is subconscious. The subconscious is created by society. And the third is the instinctive, which is given by biological nature: that which you really are biologically, that which you are born with. That’s a third part, the deepest: the biological, instinctive nature.
This second, subconscious mind is controlling outward behavior and also controlling inward instincts. Nothing should be allowed to come up to the conscious mind from your instinctive nature if the society is against it. Nothing should be allowed to come up – even up to your consciousness. So this subconscious creates a great barrier for the instinctive nature.
For example, sex is an instinct, the deepest, because without it life cannot exist on earth. So life depends on sex. It is not easily dispensable; obviously it must not be, otherwise life will become just impossible. So it has a deep grip. But the society is anti-sex; it is bound to be. The more a society is organized, the more it will be anti-sex – because if your sex instinct can be controlled then everything can be controlled, and if your sex instinct cannot be controlled then nothing can be controlled. So it becomes a fighting ground.
You must be aware that whenever a society becomes sexually free, that society cannot exist. It is defeated. When Greek culture became sexually free, Greek civilization had to die. When Roman civilization became sexually free, it had to die. Now America cannot exist anymore. America has begun to be sexually free. The moment a society becomes sexually free, the individual is not in its grip. You cannot force him.
Really, unless you suppress sex you cannot force your youth to war. It is impossible. You can force your youth into war only if you suppress sex. So the hippie slogan is really meaningful: “Make love, not war!” So society has to suppress the deepest instinct. Once it is suppressed, you can never rebel. Many things have to be understood about it.
Children, when they mature sexually, begin to be rebellious – never before. The moment a boy is mature he will begin to be rebellious against his parents, never before – because with sex comes individuality. With sex he really becomes a man, never before. Now he can be independent. Now he has the initial energy with him because he can propagate, he can reproduce. Now he is complete.
At fourteen a boy is complete, a girl is complete. They can be independent of their fathers and mothers, so rebellion begins to take shape. If the society has to control them, sex must be suppressed. All instincts have to be suppressed because we have not yet been able to create a society in which freedom is not against all, in which one individual’s freedom is not against all. We have not yet been able.
We are still primitive, not yet civilized, because a society can be called civilized and cultured only when each individual grows to his total potentiality, is not suppressed. But politics will not allow it, religions will not allow it, because once you give total freedom to instinctive nature, then churches and temples and the so-called religious business cannot continue. Religion will be there, more authentic, but religions cannot continue, because if you cannot create fear, then no one will go to this religious business.
People come because of fear; and if you suppress their instincts they become fearful – fearful of themselves. A child feels existential fear for the first time when his sex is suppressed. He feels guilty. He begins to feel that something is wrong, and he also begins to feel that “No one has this evil that I have inside. I am guilty.” You create guilt; then you can control. Then he feels inferior inside, afraid. This fear is then exploited by religious heads, by political leadership, because they all want to dominate.
You can dominate only when people are fearful. How can you create fear? If you can convince them that something which is constantly within them is sin, they will be fearful. They will be fearful! Sex will be there all the time and they will become afraid – afraid of themselves, and guilty. Then they cannot enjoy anything. Then their whole life becomes a frustration. Then they go on seeking help somewhere, guidance; someone to take away their responsibility, someone to lead them to heaven, someone to protect them from hell.
This third instinctive layer is the unconscious. The subconscious is controlling it every moment, and it controls so fanatically that everything is destroyed, or at least distorted. We never feel from the third layer what real instinct is. We never feel. Everything is distorted. From this subconscious mind – the most suppressed, the most distorted, the most destroyed – come all the miseries. All the miseries, all the paranoia, all the schizophrenia, all mental diseases, they come from this third layer.
These three – conscious, subconscious and unconscious – these are the three types of thoughts. The deeper the layer the thought comes from, the more irrelevant it looks. So if you just write down your thoughts as they happen, you will feel that you are just mad. What is going on in your mind? What type of thinking is going on? Most of it looks irrelevant. It is not! It is relevant, only with missing links, because the subconscious will not allow everything to come up. Something escapes and comes to the mind, and the gaps are there.
That’s why you cannot understand your dreams, because even in dreams the subconscious is always alert not to allow everything and so the unconscious has to try symbolic routes. It has to change everything just to escape the censor of the subconscious. So it goes on giving you messages in symbolic, pictorial forms.
Your mind is flooded: first, with outward reactions and reflections which are natural; second, by subconscious thoughts which have been produced by the society; and third, by instinctive nature which has been totally suppressed. These three constantly flood the mind. And because of these you are constantly wavering – constantly wavering and trembling. You cannot even sleep. Dreams will continue; that means mind will continue wavering. The mind is just a mad thing going round and round and round twenty-four hours a day.
In this state of affairs, how can you be still? How can you attain “the posture,” the nonwavering mind? How can you achieve it? And when the rishi says that Nonwavering knowing is the posture – the right posture – he means that unless these layers are broken and the contents released, you will never be in a state of pure knowing. The mind will not be cleansed; you will not attain the purity of perception. So what to do? What to do to achieve this nonwavering knowing?
Three things: one, whenever you are living moment to moment, don’t allow your subconscious to constantly interfere. Sometimes, just drop the subconscious and live in the moment. It is not needed. Sometimes it is needed: when you are driving the subconscious is needed, because the skill of driving becomes a part of the subconscious. That’s why you can talk and you can smoke and you can think and you can drive. The driving is now not a conscious effort, it has been taken over by the subconscious. So it is good to use it whenever it is needed, but when it is not needed just drop it, put it aside. Without any murmur, just put it aside and be in the moment.
There are many moments when the subconscious is not needed, but you only go on using it because of old habit. You have come back from the office and you are sitting in your garden – why should the subconscious come in now? You can listen to the birds, just as once you listened when you were a child without a subconscious.
Relax in these moments, and just be there with the reality. Don’t allow your subconscious mind to come in. Just put it aside. Play with children – put the subconscious aside.
A father who cannot play with his children as their equal cannot really be a right father, because no communication is possible unless you are equal to them. A mother cannot really be a mother unless she can become a child again with her child. Then there is a rapport. Then both become equal. Then there is a friendship. Then a different quality of love comes in. So, really, a child never feels independent, free, at liberty with his parents – never. He begins to feel freedom for the first time when he goes to his chums – not with his parents.
So remember constantly that whenever you can relax your subconscious, relax it. It is not needed that it is there every moment.
There are many moments when it is not needed, but you will not relax it even in your bed. You have gone to sleep and it is working. You want to sleep and it will not allow you. It says, “I have much work to do.” It goes on thinking, it goes on working. You can put off the light – mm? – that means you stop the first, the peripheral mind. Now there will be no light, you will not be able to see. You can close the doors. Now there will be no noise, no sound. You have completely closed yourself off from outside stimuli. That means now you need not react, so the first layer of the mind is relaxed.
But what to do with the second layer? You put off the light, close the doors, close your ears, close your eyes, but it goes on working, because you have never allowed it not to work. Really, a man is not the master of his mind unless he achieves this: that when he wants to work with the mind he works, when he doesn’t want to work with the mind he doesn’t. And the second capacity is the greater.
I am reminded:

Lieh Tzu was asked by a Chinese emperor, “I have heard many, many miracles about a particular saint. I have heard that he can walk on water and fly in the sky, that gravitation has no effect on him and he can produce things from out of the blue. So I want to ask, Lieh Tzu, can your Master Lao Tzu also do such miracles?”
Lieh Tzu said, “Yes, he can do them. He is capable of doing any miracle.”
Then the emperor said, “But I have never heard that he has ever done any. Why is he not doing them?”
Lieh Tzu said, “He is also capable of a greater miracle. That is, he is capable of not doing also. He is capable of doing a miracle, and he is even capable of not doing it.”

The second is greater, because to do a miracle is, of course, a power. But when you have the power, then not to use it is a greater power. It is really impossible; the second miracle is really impossible! And because of that second miracle, Buddha never did any miracle, Mahavira never did any miracle – because of that second capacity. That is greater.
You think that a miracle is a miracle, but if you can be in a nonthinking state it is an even greater one. It needs only the breaking of an old habit. But you have never tried it, you have used your subconscious constantly; your subconscious mind doesn’t have any memory of when you have allowed it not to work. So the first thing to do is to allow your subconscious mind to be put aside sometimes. Don’t use it, and soon you will have a less-wavering mind. You can become capable of this, and it is not difficult. You must only become conscious of your subconscious workings. Don’t allow – just relax sometimes and tell your subconscious mind: Stop!
One thing more to remember: never fight with it, otherwise you will never be capable of this nonwavering. Never fight with it, because when a master begins to fight with his servant he accepts equality. When a master begins to fight with a servant he has accepted him as the master. So please remember: never fight with the subconscious mind otherwise you will be defeated. Just order it – never fight.
Know the difference – that’s what I mean when I say just order it. Just say to it, Stop! and begin to work. Never fight with it. This is a mantra, and the mind begins to follow it. Just say, Stop! – nothing more, nothing less. Say, Stop totally! and begin to behave as if the mind had stopped. Soon you will become capable, and you will be just wonder-struck at how this mind stops by just saying, Stop! It is because mind has no will.
You might have seen someone in a hypnotic trance. What happens? In a hypnotic trance, the hypnotist simply goes on giving orders and the mind follows – the man follows. Absurd orders, and the man begins to follow, the hypnotized subject follows them. Why? – because the conscious mind has only been put to sleep, and the subconscious mind has no will of its own. Just tell it to do something and it will do it.
But we are not aware of our own capacity, so rather than ordering we go on begging, or at the most we begin to fight. When you fight you are divided. Your own will begins to fight with you. The subconscious mind has no will at all. So if you want to stop smoking, don’t try. Just order and stop. Don’t try at all. If you fall in the trap of trying you will never win, because you have accepted something which is not there. You just have to say to the mind, “I stop now, this very moment,” and soon you will become aware that things begin to happen. It is natural. Nothing is strange about it, it is just natural. You have to be aware of it just once, that’s all. So just put the subconscious mind aside and begin to live in the moment.
Then the second thing you have to do is: when you have become capable of putting the mind aside when something outside is working as a stimulus, then try the other way – when some instinct is coming up, just put the subconscious mind aside. It will be a bit difficult, but when the first thing has been achieved it will not be difficult at all. Just see now that again sex is coming up, that anger is coming up, and just say to the subconscious mind, “Let me face it directly. Don’t come in – let me face it directly. You are not needed.” Just order the mind and face the instinct directly. Once you begin to encounter your own instincts directly, you will be the master without the need of any control.
When you need control, you are really not the master. A master never needs control. If you say, “I can control my anger,” you are not the master because a controlled thing can erupt any moment, and you will remain constantly in fear of that which you have controlled. There will be a constant fight. In any weak moment you will be defeated. So please don’t control. Be a master – don’t control. These are two completely different dimensions.
When I say be a master, this mastery comes only when you encounter your nature, your biological nature as it is, in its purity. I wonder, have you ever seen your sex in its purity without moral teachings coming in, without the gurus and mahatmas dropping in, without the scriptures? Have you seen your sex instinct in its purity, in its pure fire? If you have seen it, you will become the master of it. If you have not seen it, you will remain a cripple and you will remain a defeated one. Howsoever you try to control, you will never be able to control it. That is impossible.
Control is impossible; mastery is possible. But mastery has a different root. Mastery means knowledge; control means fear. When you fear something, you begin to control. When you know something you become the master; there is no need to control. And knowledge means direct encounter. Instincts should be known in their purity. Drop the subconscious, because it is a constantly disturbing factor. It goes on distorting things, it will never allow you to see things as they are. It will always put the society in between, and you will see things through the society – as they are not.
Really, this is the miracle of the subconscious mind – that if you look through it things begin to be as you see them. The subconscious mind can impose any color, any shape on things. Just put it aside; face your biological nature directly. It is beautiful. It is wonderful. Just face it directly. It is divine. Don’t allow any moralistic nonsense to distort it. See it as it is.
Science observes things, and the basis of its observation is that the observer must not come in, he must remain just an observer, and whatsoever the thing reveals should be allowed. The observer must not come in to disturb and destroy or distort or give a shape or a color. A scientist is working in his lab: even if something comes up which destroys his whole concept, his whole philosophy, his whole religion, he must not allow his mind to come in. He must allow the truth to be revealed as it is.
The same goes for inner working, inner research; allow your biological nature to reveal itself in its pure being. Once you know it you will be the master, because knowledge means mastery, knowledge means power. Only ignorance is weak. Through control there is no knowledge, because the whole concept of control is brought in by the subconscious, by the society.
So if you can do two things with your subconscious: one, allowing the fact of the outside existence to come to you directly; and then, two, allowing the facticity of the inside existence to be realized in its purity, in its innocence. Then a miracle happens. It is a miracle, and that miracle is this: that the subconscious and the unconscious drop. Then mind is not divided in three. Then mind becomes one. That oneness of mind, undivided oneness, is what the Upanishads call “the knowing” – because even the knower is not there. When these three divisions have dropped, when even this division of knower is not there, then only pure knowing, only mirror-like knowing remains.
With this knowing you have two centers: one, the outside periphery where you unite with the universe; and another, the inside where again you unite with the universe. And this knowing joins both the inner and the outer – the atma and the brahman.
This pure knowing is without any trembling. This pure knowing is “the posture,” the right posture in which enlightenment happens, the realization happens, in which you become one with truth. This is the door – but how to cleanse…? It is not simply a theory, it is not a theoretical statement at all. It is just a scientific procedure, it is a process. Do something to dissolve the divisions of the mind. And if you want to dissolve the mind, concentrate on the subconscious, the middle portion of the mind, which is society. Drop it!
It is, of course, necessary for a child to be brought up in a society. It is necessary. So the subconscious is a necessary evil: the society has to teach him many things, but they should not become fetters. That’s why I say that a better society, a real, moral society, will also teach, side by side, how to break this subconscious. A better society will give its children the subconscious, with a conscious methodology of how to drop it when it is not needed and how to be free of it.
It is needed up to the point when you become aware, when you achieve an awakened state of mind. Until then it is needed. It is just like a blind man’s staff. A staff cannot be a substitute for eyes: it is just a groping in the dark. A blind man needs it, and it is helpful. But a blind man can become so much attached to his staff that when his eyes are healed and he has begun to see, he still cannot throw away his staff and goes on groping. Because groping is easier when the eyes are closed, he remains with closed eyes and goes on groping with his staff.
This subconscious is like a blind man’s staff. A child is born, but he is not born aware. The society has to give him something so that he can move and grope – some values, some ideals, some thoughts. But they should not become the eyes. What I am saying is: if you drop the divisions and create more awareness within yourself you will have eyes, and with those eyes this staff is not needed.
But it is a related thing. If you drop the subconscious you will become aware; if you become aware then the subconscious will drop. So begin from anywhere. You can begin by being more aware, then the subconscious will drop – mm? This is a samkhya process, this is a samkhya methodology: just be aware, and by and by the subconscious will drop. The yoga process is a second way – the other, the contrary – drop the subconscious, and you will become more aware. Both are related.
So wherever you want to begin, the important thing is to begin. Begin from anywhere, either from being more conscious or from being less obsessed with the subconscious, and when these divisions drop, you will have a pure knowing. That pure knowing is “the posture.” With that pure knowing, with that nonwavering knowing, your body will achieve a stillness you have not known at all.
We are not aware, that’s why we don’t know how disturbed we are in our bodies. You cannot sit still, and if you try to sit still, then for the first time you will become aware of subtle movements in the body; the leg will begin to say something, the hand will begin to say something, the neck will begin to say something, every part of the body will begin to give you information. Why? It is not that when you sit still the body begins to move, it is moving every moment. It is only because you are otherwise occupied that you are not aware. There are subtle movements continuously; your body is constantly moving and moving. This constant wavering really doesn’t belong to your body, it belongs to your mind. The body only reflects. You cannot even sleep in a nonmoving posture. The whole night you are moving this way and that, moving and moving and moving.
Now we have pictures from some American “sleep labs.” They have taken pictures, movies – movies of sleeping persons. If you could see your own movie, how much you move in the night, you will see that the whole night you are disturbed. By your body movements it can be seen that much is going on inside – much! There are so many facial gestures, so many gestures of the hands, fingers – the whole body. This shows that much is happening inside. A madman must be inside, otherwise these gestures are impossible. But you are never aware of what is happening to you. No one is aware. Everyone is asleep; no one is aware. So you don’t know what you are doing in your sleep with your body. But that doing is because of the mind. A disturbed mind is reflected by the body.
A buddha sits just like a statue. It is not that he has forced his body to be still. The mind is still, and the body need not reflect because there is nothing to reflect.

Once Buddha stayed outside a big capital with his ten thousand monks. The king became interested. Someone said, “You must come to see this man.” The name of the king was Ajata Shatru. The name means “someone whose enemy is not born at all.” Mm? – ajatashatru means one who has no enemies in the world; no enemy is born, no enemy can be born. But this Ajata Shatru was very fearful of enemies. He became interested because so many people came and said, “You must come. This is something strange, this man is something strange. Come and see.” So he came.
He reaches the grove, the garden. The evening has fallen. He asks his courtiers, “You said that he is staying with ten thousand monks, but no noise is heard – are you deceiving me?” He pulls out his sword. He thinks that there is some deception, that they have brought him to this forest and now someone is going to kill him. “You say ten thousand monks are staying just beyond these trees? – and there is not a bit of noise.” The forest is absolutely silent, and Ajata Shatru says, “I have seen this forest many times, it has never been so silent before. Even when no one was staying here it has never been so silent – even the birds are silent. What do you mean? Do you want to deceive me?”
They say, “Don’t be afraid. He is staying here. That’s why the forest is so silent and even the birds are so silent. You come.”
But he puts his sword in his hand. He is afraid and trembling. When he reaches the forest, Buddha is sitting under a tree and ten thousand monks are also sitting under trees – everyone just like a stone statue. He asks Buddha, “What has happened to all these people? Are they dead? I have become afraid. They look like ghosts – no one moving, not even eyes moving. What has happened to them?”
Buddha says, “Much has happened to them. They are not mad now.”
Unless one can be so silent, one can never feel what existence means, what life means, what the bliss of it is, the benediction. Only in such silence does life descend. You become aware of the music, of the nectar. You begin to feel it, but only in silence. That silence comes only when you are nonwavering. If you are wavering, if the mind is just wavering and there is trembling inside, you cannot feel that silence.
You cannot attain silence directly: you have to attain nonwavering, then silence comes as a shadow. If nonwavering comes, then silence comes. So Buddha says, “Much has happened to these fellows. They are not mad now. They have become silent and now they are one with these trees, with this earth, with this sky” – because you can be divided only by noise. Silence never divides, silence joins you.
For example, if we are sitting here and everyone becomes so silent that not a thought has any existence, not a single ripple is there in the mind, everyone silent, totally silent, will you be different from anyone else? Will you be different from your neighbor? How can you be different? The feeling of difference is a thought. Do I mean you will feel one with them? No, because the feeling of oneness is a thought. You will simply be one, not a feeling. Really, there will be no one here – just silence.
So Buddha says, “They are now one with the trees, with the earth, with the sky. Really, they are not here. Only silence prevails, and that’s why even birds have caught the infection.” Ten thousand people so silent that even the birds in the trees have become aware! They have felt – the silence has become infectious. “So you are right, Ajata Shatru,” Buddha says, “that you might have passed through this grove many times and it has never been so silent. It will never again be so silent because, for the first time, silence is present here in ten thousand minds.” So silence has become ten thousandfold, and everything is affected. Even trees are afraid to move. Even birds are afraid to tremble, to make noise. It is evening, they are coming back, and when birds come back they create much noise – but not a single ripple.

When you begin to be silent you begin to be in deep communion with existence. Thoughts and thoughts are noises. Waves and waves are thoughts and tremblings inside. They create a barrier, they disrupt – they make you alone. Then you begin to be alone in this whole universe, and that loneliness creates meaninglessness. The more lonely you are, the more you will feel meaningless, futile, useless, and then you will begin to fill yourself with more noise. You will try to fill yourself with radio, television, with anything to be occupied. You run from here to there, from this club to that club. Go on running, don’t leave any gap in which you might become aware of your loneliness! So this whole life just becomes a running from one point to another. This is madness, and the whole earth has become a madhouse.
So attain to this posture – and don’t begin with the body. Begin with the subconscious mind, and then your body will reflect what is happening within. Even now it is reflecting what is happening within. The body is a mirror, it is transparent. Those who have eyes, they know that the body is transparent. You enter here and I know what is happening inside you, because you cannot enter without showing it. You look at me, and I know what is happening inside your eyes – because how can you raise your eyes without expressing that which is within? It is being shown every moment.
Every moment is an indication. It is related; nothing is irrelevant. Your body is showing every moment, but you don’t know the body language. The body has a language of its own, and it shows everything. You cannot deceive. You can deceive with your language, but not with your body. You can smile, but your lips will say that there is no smile within. You can show something by your face, you can try, but still the face will give hints that this is false.
This body is just giving information every moment. You cannot change it. You can try, but you cannot change it. And even if you succeed in changing your body, you can succeed only in deceiving others, not yourself, because the inside cannot change by the outside changing. It is not basic. You can cut a tree by the roots, but not by the leaves. If you cut the leaves, new leaves will come up again and one leaf will be replaced by two. Cut two, and four leaves will come out of that spot. The tree will take revenge, the roots will take revenge. They will say, “You are cutting one leaf – we will put two. We are capable of constantly supplying – infinitely.”
So don’t be bothered by leaves. And the body has only leaves: roots are deep within. Cut the roots, and the leaves will wither away by themselves. When there are no roots to feed the leaves will drop by themselves. Your body will change. Change the mind and the body will change. Mind is the root.
Attain a nonwavering knowing and the door will be open, and you will be able to have a glimpse into the unknown. The unknown is not far off; only you are closed. The unknown is here, but you are running. The unknown is here, but you are in such a hurry and in such speed that you cannot look at it.
Stand still! I don’t mean your body. Let your mind stand still, your consciousness, and suddenly you will become aware of something which has always been there. You have been seeking for it, seeking and searching, running after for lives and lives – and it was here. It is so near, and that’s why you have missed it. It is just by the corner, and you have sought it everywhere except this place where you are standing.
Nonwavering reveals to you the here and now. That standing still in consciousness reveals to you the presence which is here.

============================================================

Osho,
Considering the example of sensual instinct, kindly explain the practical ways to encounter the unconscious mind, and how can one know that one has become free from it?
The unconscious is not really unconscious. Rather, it is only less conscious. So the difference between conscious and unconscious is not of polar opposites, but of degrees. The unconscious and conscious are related, joined, they are not two. But our ways of thinking are based on a particular false system of logic which divides everything into polar opposites.
Reality is never divided like that; only logic is divided. Our logic says either yes or no; our logic says either light or darkness – and there is nothing in between as far as logic goes. But life is neither white nor black. It is, rather, a great expanse of gray. One extreme becomes white, another extreme becomes black, and life is a great expanse of gray, degrees of gray. For logic, white and black are realities and there is nothing in between – but life is always in between these two. So, really, every problem should be understood not as a logical problem, but as a life problem – only then can you do something with it. If you are too fixed with this false logic, then you will never be able to solve any problem.
Aristotle has proved to be one of the greatest menaces, blocks, to the human mind, because he created a system – which became dominant all over the world – that divides everything into two opposites. Really, this is a strange fact. We have nothing for the in-between reality – not even words.
De Bono, a modern non-Aristotelian logician, has created a new word – po. He says that we have only two words, yes or no, and there is no neutral word. Yes is one opposite, no is another – there is no neutral word. So he has coined a new word – po. Po means, “I am neither for nor against.” If you say something and I say, “Po,” it means, “I have heard you, I am neither for nor against. I am not making any judgment.” Or, to say, “Po,” means, “Perhaps you are right, perhaps you are wrong. Both are possible.” Or, the use of the word po means, “This is also one point of view. I need not be on the yes side or the no. It is not a compulsion.”
De Bono has derived this word from words like hypothesis or potentiality. This po is a neutral word, not loaded with any judgment, condemnation or appreciation. Just use the word po and you will feel the difference. You are not taking any standpoint in the polar opposites.
So when I say conscious and unconscious, I don’t mean the Freudian opposition. For Freud, conscious is conscious and unconscious is unconscious. The difference is that of white and black, yes and no, life and death. When I say unconscious, I mean less conscious. When I say conscious, I mean less unconscious. They overlap each other.
So what to do to encounter the unconscious? As far as Freud is concerned the encounter is impossible: because it is unconscious, how can you encounter it? The question means the same as if someone says, “How to see in darkness?” Mm? The question is irrelevant, meaningless. If you put it in this way, “How to see in darkness?” and if I say, “With light,” then the question has not been answered at all, because you ask, “How to see in darkness?” and if there is light, then there is no darkness – you are seeing light.
So, really, in darkness no one can see. When we say “darkness” we mean that now seeing is not possible. What do you mean when you say “darkness”? You mean that now seeing is not possible. What do you mean when you say “light”? You mean that now things can be seen. Really, you have never seen light, you have only seen light reflected in things which you can see. You have never seen light itself, no one can see it. We see only things, not light, and because things are seen we assume, infer, that light is there.
You have not seen darkness; no one has seen it. Really, darkness is just an inference. Because nothing is seen, you say there is darkness. So when someone asks, “How to see in darkness?” the words look meaningful, but they are not. Language is very deceptive, and unless one becomes careful in using language one will never be able to solve any problem. Ninety-nine percent of problems are just linguistic problems, but if you don’t know how to penetrate the garb of language you will never be able to tackle the real problem.
If you ask Freud how to encounter the unconscious, he will say, “It is nonsense, you cannot encounter it. If you encounter it, it will become conscious, because encountering is a conscious phenomenon.” But if you ask me how to encounter the unconscious, I will say, yes, there are ways to encounter it – because for me, the first thing to be noted is that “unconscious” means simply “less conscious.” So if you grow more conscious, you can encounter it – so it depends.
Secondly, unconscious and conscious are not fixed boundaries. They change every moment – just like the retina of the eye. It is changing constantly. If there is more light, it is narrowed down. If there is less light, then it widens. It is constantly making an equilibrium with the light outside. So your eye is not really a fixed thing, it is constantly changing. Your consciousness is just like that. Really, to understand the phenomenon of consciousness by the analogy of the eye is very relevant, because consciousness is the inner eye, the eye of the soul. So, just like your eye, your consciousness is constantly expanding or shrinking. It depends.
For example, if you are angry you become more unconscious. The unconscious is now more spread, and only a very minor part of you remains conscious. Sometimes even that part is not there either, you become completely unconscious. But in a sudden accident – you are on the road and suddenly you feel that there is going to be an accident and you are on the verge of death – suddenly you become conscious and there is no unconscious at all. The whole mind is conscious. And this change is continuously taking place.
So when I say conscious and unconscious, I don’t mean any fixed boundaries. There are none, there are no fixed boundaries. It is a fluctuating phenomenon. It depends on you to be less conscious or more conscious. You can create consciousness; you can train and discipline yourself for more consciousness or for less consciousness. If you train yourself for less consciousness, you will never be able to encounter the unconscious. Really, you will even become incapable of encountering the conscious.
When someone has taken some intoxicant, he is training his mind to be totally unconscious. When you go into sleep, or if you can be hypnotized, or if you can auto-hypnotize yourself, then you lose consciousness. There are many tricks, and many of those tricks which help you to be more unconscious are even known as religious practices. If you do any monotonous, repetitive thing – for example, if you go on continuously saying “Rama-Rama-Rama-Rama” in a very monotonous tone, you will become less conscious. And this constant repetition of “Rama-Rama-Rama” in a monotonous tone will be just auto-hypnotic. You will go to sleep: it is good for sleep.
If you can create monotony then you will be less conscious, because a bored mind cannot remain conscious. The boredom is too much, and the mind would like to go to sleep.
We know, every mother knows, how to put a child to sleep. A lullaby does nothing but create boredom. Every mother knows how to put a child to sleep. With a lullaby – a constant repetition of certain words – the child is bored, so he goes into sleep. This lullaby can be created by movement, by anything which is monotonous – by anything. Just move the child monotonously, rotate the child monotonously, and he will go to sleep because he feels bored. Even if you put the child’s head near your heart he will go to sleep, because your heartbeat is a very boring thing. So put the child near your heart, and he will feel bored because of the constant repetition of the heartbeat. The child knows it very well because he has heard it continuously for nine months. Even old persons can use the tick-tick of a clock for going into sleep, and the reason is only the resemblance to the heartbeat. So if you feel that sleep is not coming, just concentrate on your clock and feel the beat, and soon you will drop into sleep.
You can create unconsciousness by creating boredom. By taking any intoxicant, by taking any drug, any sedative, any tranquilizer, you can create unconsciousness. Consciousness can also be created, but then quite different methods have to be used.
Sufi mystics use whirling dances. With such vigorous whirling you cannot sleep, it is impossible. How can you fall asleep when dancing? Someone seeing your dance may go to sleep, for him it may become a boring thing, but you cannot go. So Sufis use dance to create more activity inside, more vitality, so that consciousness spreads. These dances are not really dances. They look like dances. The Sufi who is doing the dance is constantly remembering every movement of the body. No movement should be done unconsciously. Even if a hand is raised, then this hand must be raised with full consciousness that you are raising the hand – now the hand is raised; now you are dropping it again. No movement should be allowed unconsciously. You are whirling around, dancing vigorously; no movement is to be made unconsciously. Every movement must be done consciously, with full alertness.
Then suddenly the unconscious drops, and after three months of continual dancing, for hours, you encounter the unconscious. You penetrate deep, deep, deep, and suddenly you become aware of everything that is inside. That is what I mean by encountering the unconscious. Nothing remains which is not in clear vision. Your totality, all your instincts, all your suppressions, your whole biological structure, everything – not only of this life, but of all lives – is suddenly revealed. You are thrown into a new world which was hidden or, rather, to which you were not alert. It was there, but you were asleep – or your consciousness was so narrowed down that it escaped.
Your consciousness is just like a torch – narrowed. You enter darkness with a torch; you have a light, but it is a narrow, focused light. You can see something, but all else remains in darkness. When I say that nothing unconscious remains, I mean unfocused consciousness – unfocused. A focused consciousness will always choose something to see and choose many things not to see; it is a choice. So I use the similarity: just like a torch, narrowed down. One point will become very clear, but everything else will be in darkness. This is what we ordinarily do through concentration.
The more you concentrate, the less you will be able to encounter the unconscious. You will be able to know something very definitely, at the cost of not knowing many things. That’s why experts, by and by, become just ignorant, ignorant of the whole world, because they have narrowed down their minds to a particular thing in order to know more about it. So it has been said that an expert is a person who knows more and more about less and less. In the end he remains focused only on a point, which he knows at the cost of ignoring everything else.
This is how concentration works. So through concentration you can never encounter the unconscious. You can encounter the unconscious only with meditation – and this is the difference between concentration and meditation. Meditation means your mind working not as a torch but like a flame: everything is enlightened around it – everything. It is not narrowed down, the light is diffused. It is not moving in one direction, it is moving in all directions simultaneously so the whole is enlightened.
How to do it? I said Sufis use dance as an active meditation and then they can encounter the unconscious. Zen monks in Japan use absurd problems to encounter it. You face some problem which cannot be solved – which cannot be solved at all! Howsoever you try, the problem is such that it cannot be solved. They call such problems, koans – absurd problems.
For example, they will say to some seeker, “Find out what your original face is.” And by “original face” they mean the face you had before you were born, or the face you will have after you die – the original face. “Find out how your original face looks.” How can you find it out? One has to meditate on it. The problem is such that you cannot solve it by intellect, by reason. You have to ponder over it, meditate over it, go on meditating and searching: “What is my original face?” The teacher will be there with his staff, and he will look around to see if someone is going into sleep. Then the teacher’s staff will be on your head. You cannot sleep; sleep is not allowed at all. You have to be constantly awake.
So a Zen teacher is a hard taskmaster. You have to meditate before him, and he will not allow you to drop into sleep because the moment when you are dropping into sleep is the moment to encounter the unconscious. If you can remain out of sleep, then the unconscious will be revealed – because that is the line. The very line from where you drop into sleep is the line where you can enter into the unconscious.
You can try this. You have been sleeping every day, but you have not yet encountered sleep. You have not seen it – what it is, how it comes, how you drop into it. You have not known anything about it. You have been dropping into it daily, coming out of it, but you have not felt the moment when sleep comes on the mind, what happens. So try this, and with three months’ effort suddenly, one day, you will enter sleep knowingly. Drop on your bed, close your eyes, and then remember, remember that sleep is coming and “I am to remain awake when the sleep comes.” It is very arduous, but it happens. In one day it will not happen, in one week it will not happen. Persist every day, constantly remembering that sleep is coming and “I am not to allow it without knowing. I must be aware when sleep enters. I must go on feeling how sleep takes over, what it is.”
One day, suddenly, sleep is there and you are still awake. That very moment you become aware of your unconscious also, and once you become aware of your unconscious you will never be asleep again in the old way. Sleep will be there, but you will be awake, simultaneously. A center in you will go on knowing. All around will be sleep, and a center will go on knowing. When this center knows, dreams become impossible, and when dreams become impossible, daydreams also become impossible. Then you are asleep in a different sense, and then you will be awake in the morning in a different sense. That different quality comes by the encounter.
But this may look difficult, so I suggest to you a more simple exercise to encounter the unconscious. Close the doors of your room and put a big mirror just in front of you. The room must be dark. Then put a small flame by the side of the mirror in such a way that it is not directly reflected in it. Just your face is reflected in the mirror, not the flame. Then constantly stare into your own eyes in the mirror. Do not blink. This is a forty-minute experiment, and within two or three days you will be able to keep your eyes unblinking.
Even if tears come, let them come, but persist in not blinking and go on staring constantly into your eyes. Do not change the stare. Go on staring into the eyes, your own, and within two or three days you will become aware of a very strange phenomenon. Your face will begin to take new shapes. You may even be scared. The face in the mirror will begin to change. Sometimes a very different face will be there which you have never known as yours.
Really, all these faces belong to you. Now the subconscious mind is beginning to explode. These faces, these masks, are yours. Sometimes even a face that belongs to a past life may come in. After one week of constant staring for forty minutes your face will become a flux, just a film-like flux. Many faces will be constantly coming and going. After three weeks you will not be able to remember which is your face. You will not be able to remember your own face, because you have seen so many faces coming and going.
If you continue, then any day, after three weeks, the most strange thing happens: suddenly there is no face in the mirror. The mirror is vacant, you are staring into emptiness. There is no face at all. This is the moment: close your eyes, and encounter the unconscious. When there is no face in the mirror just close the eyes – this is the most significant moment – close the eyes, look inside, and you will face the unconscious. You will be naked, completely naked – as you are. All deceptions will fall.
This is the reality, but the society has created many, many layers in order that you will not be aware of it. Once you know yourself in your nakedness, your total nakedness, you begin to be a different person. Then you cannot deceive yourself. Then you know what you are. And unless you know what you are you can never become transformed, because any transformation becomes possible only in this naked reality: this naked reality is the potential for any transformation. No deception can be transformed. Your original face is now here and you can transform it. And, really, just a will to transform it will effect the transformation.
But you cannot become transformed. You cannot transform your false faces. You can change them, but you cannot transform them: by “change” I mean you can replace them with another false face. A thief can become a monk, a criminal can become a saint. It is very easy to change, to replace the masks, the faces. These are not transformations at all. Transformation means becoming that which you really are. So the moment you face the unconscious, encounter the unconscious, you are face to face with your reality, with your authentic being.
The false societal being is not there, your name is not there, your form is not there, your face is not there. The naked forces of nature are there, and with these naked forces any transformation is possible – and by just willing it! Nothing is to be done. You just will, and things begin to happen. If you face yourself in this nakedness, just will whatsoever you like and it will be.
In the Bible it is said: God said, “Let there be light,” and there was light. In the Koran it is said: God said, “Let there be the world,” and there was the world. Really, these are parables – parables of the willpower which is hidden within you. When you encounter your naked reality, the basic, elemental forces, you become a creator, a god. Just say, utter a word, and it happens. Say, “Let there be light,” and there will be light. If you try to transform darkness into light before the encounter, it is not possible. So this encounter is basic, foundational, for any religious happening.
Many, many methods have been invented. There are sudden methods, there are gradual methods. I have told you about a gradual method. There are sudden methods, but with a sudden method it is always very difficult, because with a sudden method it can happen that you may simply die. With a sudden method it can happen that you may suddenly go mad because the phenomenon is so sudden that you cannot conceive of it. You just drop, shattered.
This happened in the Gita. Arjuna is forcing Krishna to reveal his cosmic form. Krishna goes on talking about other things, but Arjuna is persistent and he says, “I must see. I cannot believe unless I see. If you are really a god, then reveal to me your cosmic form.” Krishna reveals it, but it is so sudden, and Arjuna is not prepared at all. He begins to cry and says to Krishna, “Close it. Close it. I am scared to death!”
So if you come to it through some sudden method it is dangerous. There are sudden methods, but they can be practiced only in a group, in a group where others can help you. Really, ashrams were created for these sudden methods because they cannot be practiced alone. A group is needed, adepts are needed and a constant vigilance is needed, because sometimes you may drop unconscious for months continuously. Then if there is no one who knows what to do you may be taken for dead. You may be buried or burned. Many times Ramakrishna happened to go into deep samadhi. For six days or for two weeks he had continually to be forcefully spoon-fed because he was just as if unconscious. A group is needed for sudden methods, and a teacher becomes an absolute necessity.
Sudden methods dropped from Indian practices because of Buddha, Mahavira and Shankaracharya, because they insisted that monks should travel continuously. They didn’t allow monks to be in ashrams. They were not to remain anywhere for more than three days. There was a need for this because at the time of Mahavira and Buddha, ashrams became just exploitation centers; they became just big businesses. So Mahavira and Buddha both insisted that a sannyasin shouldn’t remain anywhere more than three days. Three days is a very psychological limit, because in order to be attuned with some place or with some people you need more than three days.
In a new house, you cannot feel at ease unless three days have passed. This is a psychological attuning time. If you remain in a house for more than three days then the house begins to look as if it is yours, so a sannyasin must not remain anywhere more than three days. Buddha and Mahavira insisted, but because of their insistence ashrams were destroyed and school methods dropped out of practice, because a wandering monk cannot practice sudden methods. He may be in a village, but no one may know anything about it, and if he practices a sudden method and the happening happens then he will be in danger, he will have to die.
So Mahavira, Buddha, and later on Shankaracharya, all these three insisted that monks go on wandering continuously. They must not remain in one place, they should be homeless wanderers. So it was good in one way, and it proved bad in another. It proved good because establishments were destroyed, but it proved bad also because with establishments certain very, very significant practices, methods, just went into oblivion.
Sudden methods require the constant vigilance of a group. A teacher becomes a necessity. So Buddha could say, “You can know even without me,” but a Patanjali cannot say that. Krishnamurti can say, “No teacher is needed,” but a Gurdjieff cannot say that. The real reason for these differences is their methods: Gurdjieff has school methods and Krishnamurti belongs to the tradition of wanderers – no school methods, so no teacher is needed.
With gradual methods you can proceed alone because there is no danger. You have to proceed inch by inch, and as far as a one-inch happening is concerned, you can control it yourself. But if you have to take a jump with no steps in between, then you will need someone who knows where you are going to fall, who knows what can happen. A teacher is not really needed to show you the methods, he is really needed afterwards, when the method has done something and you have moved into the unknown.
So there are sudden methods, but I will not talk about them. I have given you one gradual method, and there are many. I will not talk about the sudden methods because it is dangerous to talk about them. If someone is interested, then he can be led. But talking is impossible. That’s why school teaching has always insisted that nothing should be written, because once you write something it becomes public and anyone can do it. Anyone can become just a victim of his own curiosity, and then no help will be coming. So even when something is written about sudden practices, a basic link is always missing.
So those who begin practices through scriptures are always in danger, and many times it happens that they just go mad – because a missing link is always bound to be there. That missing link is always supplied by word of mouth from the teacher to the disciple, and it is a private and secret process, the missing link, because that is the key. No scripture is really complete and no scripture can ever be really complete because those who know can never write a thing completely. Something must remain hidden as a key, so no one can use it. You can read about it, you can comment on it, you can write a thesis upon it, but you cannot practice it because a certain key is not given in the scripture itself. Or, if it is given, it is given in such a way that you cannot decode it; the technique for decoding it is not given in it.
So nothing about sudden practices – but you can do something gradually. This mirror meditation is a very powerful method, very powerful – to know one’s own abyss and to know one’s own naked reality, and once you have known it you become the master. Then just say something, and things begin to take shape. In that encounter, if you say, “I must die this moment,” you will die that very moment. If you say, “I must become a buddha this very moment,” you will become a buddha that very moment. Time is not required at all, just a will.
You may begin to think that then it is very easy, but it is a difficult problem. First, to reach it is difficult, though not so difficult, but to will in that moment is very difficult. Such a vital silence takes you over you cannot even think. Your mind cannot even move. You are in such awe, everything stops – even breathing. A very still moment, totally silent, and will becomes impossible. So one has to train oneself how to will in that still moment – how to will without words, how to will without thoughts. That is possible, but one has to practice for it.
You are looking at a flower: look at the flower, feel the beauty of it, but don’t use the word beautiful, not even in the mind. Look at it, let it be absorbed in you, reach to it, but don’t use words. Feel the beauty of it, but don’t say, “It is beautiful,” not even in the mind. Don’t verbalize, and gradually you will become capable of feeling a flower as beautiful without using the word.
Really, it is not difficult: it is natural. You feel first; then the word comes. But we are so habituated with words that there is no gap. The feeling is there, and suddenly the word comes and you have not even felt it. So create a gap: just feel the beauty of it, but don’t use the word.
If you can dissociate words from feeling, then you can dissociate even feeling from existence. Then let the flower be there and you be there as two presences, but don’t allow the feeling to come in. Don’t even feel now that the flower is beautiful. Don’t feel. Let the flower be there and you be there, arrowed, in a deep embrace without any ripple of feeling. Then you will feel beauty without feeling. Really, then you will be the beauty of the flower. It will not be a feeling; you will be the flower. Then you have felt something existentially. When you can do this, you can will. When everything is lost – thought, words, feeling – then you can will existentially.
To help this will, many things have been used. One is that the seeker must constantly go on thinking, “When the thing comes, when that happening happens, what am I going to be?” The sutras of the Upanishads – like aham brahmasmi, I am the brahman – are not meant as literal statements. These sutras are not meant as statements, they are not meant as philosophical theories, they are meant to engrave a deep will in the very cells of your being. So when that moment comes you don’t need your mind to tell you, “I am the brahman.” Your body begins to feel it, your cells begin to feel it, your every fiber begins to feel it: aham brahmasmi. This feeling does not need to be created by you, it will have gone deep into your existence. Then suddenly, when you encounter the unconscious and the moment of will has come and you can become a creator, your whole existence begins to vibrate: aham brahmasmi. The moment your existence begins to vibrate aham brahmasmi, you become brahman – you become! Whatsoever you can feel, you become.
This should not be known as metaphysics – it is not. It is an experience. So you can know it only through experiencing. Do not decide whether it is right or wrong; do not think in terms of yes and no. Just say, “Po,” and make some effort. Just say, “Okay. It may be.” Don’t decide – because we are very hasty deciders. Someone will say, “No, it is not possible.” Really, he is saying, “I am not going to try”; he is not saying it is not possible. He is deceiving himself. He is saying, “I am not going to try,” and because of this “I am not going to try,” how can it be possible? He is rationalizing for himself.
Someone else says, “Yes, it is possible. It has happened to many. It has happened to my guru, to my teacher, it has happened to this one and that.” He is also not going to try because he is making it a trivial fact: “It has happened to many, so it is not a thing which one has to try for.” He feels, “It can also happen to me.” No, don’t say yes or no. Just take it as an experiment, a hypothesis to be worked out. Religion is not a given thing; one has to create it in oneself. It is not something which is given to you or which can be given; it is something which you have to uncover in yourself.
So don’t decide unless you experience, don’t decide unless you know. Never decide beforehand, otherwise you can go on continuously listening to things, thinking about them, and doing nothing – because thinking is not doing; thinking is just an escape from doing.

Osho,
Is your technique of fast breathing a sudden technique or a gradual one?
It is gradual. Really, sudden techniques cannot be given publicly. They cannot be given. For sudden techniques one has to put aside, bracket the whole life out, because for sudden techniques your totality will be needed. For gradual techniques your totality is not needed. You can do them for one hour and then remain in the world for twenty-three hours. But for sudden techniques your totality will be needed, you cannot be allowed to do anything else. So the whole life has to be just bracketed out, and you have to be totally for the technique. The whole consciousness must be prepared for it because even a single part remaining unprepared will prove dangerous – and anything can prove dangerous because the moment is so potential. The moment is so potential, you must be purified of all that goes on around you. So you have to eliminate, bracket everything out. With gradual methods, religion can be one thing among others. For sudden methods, religion has to be totalitarian; nothing else can be allowed.
When someone would go to Gurdjieff, he would ask, “Are you ready to die for it? – nothing less will do. Are you ready to die for it?” That means, “Are you ready to leave everything for it?” Total consciousness is needed. It is not necessary to die, but one has to be ready to die for it.
For gradual methods, such is not the requirement. You can go on living and doing something. By and by, the doing will gradually become greater; and without even becoming aware, some day you will become ready to die for it. But this growth is like the growth of a pregnancy: by and by. Even the mother is not aware of what is going on, of what is happening. The child goes on growing and growing and growing. After nine months the child has grown so much that now the mother is not needed at all, that’s why he comes out. The mother feels so much pain. The reason is not only physical: deep down it is psychological. It is because her own child has grown so much that it is leaving her. This is the first betrayal. Now many betrayals will follow. This is the first birth pain; now many will follow. When the child becomes sexually mature he will again leave his mother – for some other woman.
So birth is a constant process. A mother has to go through many pains, and if she cannot understand it, then she unnecessarily creates troubles. She creates them! Even when the child is going to be born the mother creates trouble, she contracts her whole body. That’s why the pain is created; otherwise bodily pain is unnecessary. It is really a conflict. The mother is not ready to give up and the child is forcing to come out. That’s why many children have to take their birth in the night – eighty percent, more than eighty percent – because when the mother is sleepy she resists less.
Now there are scientific methods and psychological ones also. If a mother can be persuaded to cooperate there is no pain. In Paris, Dr. Leboyer has worked with many, many methods – psychological, persuasive methods. He has delivered thousands of births, helped mothers, and there was no pain at all – not at all. The method is to cooperate with the child coming out – not to resist, but to cooperate; to help the child, to feel that you have to help the child to come out.
Leboyer may persuade many mothers, but there is a still greater problem when the child goes to another woman. He will have to persuade the mother not to feel hurt. Rather, she should help the child to go to someone else. She should help, cooperate, because it is a second birth and she is troubled unnecessarily.
With gradual methods you grow like a pregnancy – by and by. Then suddenly one day you are reborn. With sudden methods it is different, totally different. One needs to give up everything for sudden methods. Sannyas, in the old days, began with sudden methods. That’s why it was necessary to leave everything. Particularly in India, we emphatically pressed the point that no one should leave for sannyas unless he was very old. There is a psychological reason: when you are so old, you can leave life totally. Then total renunciation becomes easy – because in a subtle way life is renouncing you, so you can renounce life. You have become a dry leaf; now you can leave the tree without hurting the tree or any hurt to yourself. The tree will not even know when the dry leaf has dropped. Pull out a young leaf that is fresh and green, and the tree is hurt and the leaf also. The wound may remain forever. So for sudden methods, it was decided that a man should leave only when life itself was leaving him. Then he could leave totally. With gradual methods, it was not necessary.
Now, in the world, sudden methods have become impossible because there are really no authentic schools, no communities, intimate communities, where you can practice sudden methods. So it is not necessary for someone to renounce the world and go to the hills or the forest. Now you can remain wherever you are and practice gradual methods. The achievement is the same; only more time is needed for gradual methods, less time for sudden methods.

Osho,
What type of society can develop individuals in whom the subconscious mind is utilitarian and easily dispensable?
It is a complex problem, multi-dimensional, but some basic points can be understood. One: a good society is possible only if children are not taught the antagonism, the dichotomy, between body and consciousness. The first thing is that they must not be taught this. It must not be said to children, “You are in the body”; it must not be said, “You possess the body.” It must be said, “You are the body.” When I say that it must be said, “You are the body,” I don’t mean a materialist conception. Really, only out of this can a spiritual being be born. The unity must not be disturbed.
The child is born as a unity, but we separate him in two. The first separation comes between body and consciousness. We sow the seeds of schizophrenia. Now he will never be able to regain the lost unity easily. The more he grows, the more the gap will grow, and a person with a gap between himself and his body is a person who is not normal. The greater the gap, the more insane he will be, because, again, “body and mind” is a linguistic fallacy. We are psychosomatic – body-mind both, simultaneously. It is not possible to bifurcate the two. They are not two – one wave.
So for a good society the first thing is not to create schizophrenic minds, not to create divided minds, because the first division comes between body and mind, then other divisions follow. Then you have taken a route for divisions. Then mind will again be divided and body will again be divided.
This is a strange fact. I wonder whether you feel that you are divided into consciousness and body. Then the body is divided into upper and lower, and the lower is “bad” and the upper is “good.” From where does the upper begin and from where does the lower begin? We are never at ease with our lower bodies, never. That’s why there is so much nonsense about clothes – so much nonsense. We cannot be naked. Why? Because the moment you are naked the body becomes one. We have two sorts of clothes – one for the lower part, another for the upper part. This division of clothes is basically connected with the division of the body. If you are standing naked, which is lower, which is higher? And how do you divide? You are one!
So those who divide man are not ready for man to be at ease with his nakedness – and this is only a beginning, because there are more nakednesses inside. If you are not ready to be naked about your body, true, then you cannot ever be true for other, deeper layers. How can you be? If you cannot face even your body’s nakedness, how can you face your naked consciousness?
This clothing is not just clothing. It has a philosophy, and a very insane one. Then the body is divided, then the mind is divided, then the conscious, unconscious, subconscious – and divisions go on growing. In the beginning a child is born as a unity, and the same child dies as a crowd – as a crowd! totally a madhouse! Everywhere he has been divided, and between these divisions there is constant conflict, struggle, and the energy is dissipated. You never really die; really you kill yourself. We are all committing suicide, because this dissipation of energy is suicide. So it is rare that a person dies – rare! Everyone has killed himself, poisoned himself. The methods are different, the tricks to kill oneself are different, but the beginning is the division.
So a good society, a moral society, a religious society, will not allow its children to be divided. But how do we create a division? How do we begin? When does the division come in?
Now psychologists are very well aware that the moment the child touches his genitalia, his sex organs, the division begins. The moment the child touches his sex organs the whole society becomes aware that something wrong is going to happen. The parents, mother and father, brothers, the whole family, everyone begins to be aware of it. In their eyes, in their gestures, by their hands, they all say, “No, do not touch.”
The child cannot conceive of this. He is a unity, she is a unity. He cannot conceive why he cannot touch his body. What is wrong? He doesn’t know that man is born in sin. He doesn’t know the Bible, he doesn’t know any religion, he doesn’t know any teachers, moral teachers, he doesn’t know any mahatmas. He cannot feel how a part of the body is just to be avoided.
The problem becomes greater because sex organs are the most sensitive part of the body and the most pleasant. To touch them is the first experience of pleasure for the child, the first experience of his own body – that the body can give pleasure, that the body is pleasant, that the body has a value. Now psychologists say that even a three-month-old baby can create orgasm – the deepest. He can feel his sex organs to their climax, and his whole body begins to vibrate. This is the first experience of his body, but it becomes poisoned because parents will not allow it. Why can’t they allow it? Because they were not allowed. There is no other reason: because they were not allowed.
With this the body is divided, and the mind and body are divided. The child becomes afraid, fearful, and guilt is born. He will touch, but now he has to hide it. So we have made a small child a criminal. He will do it because it is natural, but now he will be afraid whether someone is looking or not, whether mother is present or not. If no one is there then he will touch, but now this touch will not give the same pleasure that it could have given because there is guilt. He is afraid. He is fearful.
This fear continues for his whole life. No one is at ease with his sex experience. The fear continues. Then he will go many, many times into the sex act but never will he feel the fulfillment and the deep ecstasy of it. He will never feel it; it has become impossible. You have poisoned the very root and he will feel guilty.
We feel guilty because of sex; we are “sinners” because of sex. So you have created the division, the basic division that in the body you have to choose: some parts are “good” and some parts are “bad.” What nonsense. Either the whole body is good or the whole body is bad, because nothing is separate in the body. The same blood goes through the whole body; the same nervous system is there. Everything is one inside, but for the child now there is a division. And another thing: you have poisoned his first joy. Now he will never feel joyful.
Daily, people come to me and I know that their basic problem is not meditation, their basic problem is not religion, their basic problem is sex. I feel very helpless as to how to help them, because if I really want to help them then they will not come to me again. They will become afraid of me because they are afraid of sex. So sex must not be talked about! Talk about God, talk about something else – never talk about sex. Their problem is not God at all. If the problem was of God then it could be easily helped, but God is not the problem. Their basic problem remains sex, and they cannot enjoy anything because they cannot enjoy the first gift that was given by nature, by divine forces. They do not have the first gift of bliss, so they cannot enjoy.
I have felt so many times that a person who cannot enjoy sex cannot go deep in meditation because wherever there is happiness he becomes afraid. The association goes deep. So you have created a barrier. Now he will also divide the mind because he cannot accept the sex part of the mind. Sex is both body and mind. Everything is both. In you, everything is both – remember it constantly. Sex is both body and mind, so the mind part of sex has to be suppressed. That suppressed part will become the unconscious. The forces, the thoughts, the moralistic preachings which will suppress it, will become the subconscious. A very small portion of the mind which is conscious will remain in your hands. It is useful only for the day-to-day routine, not for anything more; at least it is not useful to live deeply, you can exist, that’s all. You can vegetate, you can earn, you can build a house, make a living, but you cannot know life because, of the whole mind, nine parts out of ten are just denied. You can never be total, and only a whole man is holy. Unless you are whole, you can never be holy.
So the first, elementary thing to be done to create a new society, a better society, a religious society, is not to create division. This is the greatest sin – to create division. Let the child grow as a unity. Let him grow as a oneness, at ease with everything that is inside him, and soon he will be able to transcend all: he will be able to transcend sex, he will be able to transcend the instinctive nature. But he will be able to transcend them as a unity, never as a division. That is the point. He will be able to transcend them because he is so whole, so powerful, so undividedly one, that he can transcend anything.
Whatsoever becomes a disease, he can just throw it out. Whatsoever becomes just an obsession, he can just throw it away. He is forceful, one. A great energy is undividedly his – he can change anything. But a divided child cannot do anything. Really, in a divided child the conscious mind is a minor part and the unconscious is the major. For his whole life, a divided child is fighting a major energy with a minor one. He is bound to be continuously defeated. And then he feels frustrated. And then he says, “Okay, this world is just a misery.”
This world is not a misery – remember it well. You are divided, so you create misery out of this world. You are fighting with yourself, so you become miserable.
So the first thing: do not create divisions. Let the child grow as a unity. And the second thing: let the child be trained more for flexibility than for fixed attitudes – flexibility. What do I mean when I say flexibility? Don’t train him in solid, watertight compartments; never say that this is bad and that is good, because in life it is a flux. The thing which is good this moment may be bad the next moment, and the thing which is bad in this situation may be good in another.
So train the child to be more aware, to find out what is the case. Never fix labels. Don’t say a Mohammedan is bad because he is a Mohammedan and a Hindu is good because he is a Hindu. Don’t say things like that, because bad and good are not fixed things. Don’t give fixed attitudes. Train him to be more aware, to find out who is good and who is bad. But it is difficult; and it is easy to give labels. You live with labels and categorized divisions. You put someone in a category: “Okay, he is a Hindu. He is bad or he is good. He is a Mohammedan, and he is good or he is bad.” The matter is decided without looking at the individual. The label decides. Don’t give fixed attitudes, give flexible awareness. Don’t say this is bad, don’t say this is good. Just say that one has to find out constantly what is good, what is bad. Train the mind to find out, to inquire.
This flexibility of attitude has many dimensions. Don’t fix the child into “monogamous” attitudes. Don’t say to the child, “Love me because I am your mother.” It may create an incapacity in the child, and he will not be able to love anyone else. Then it happens that grown-up children – I call them grown-up children – continue to be fixed. So you cannot love your wife because deep inside you can love only your mother. But your wife is not your mother and your mother cannot be your wife, so you continue to be fixed – a mother fixation. You continue to be fixed! You go on expecting things from your wife as if she were your mother – not consciously. If she does not behave like a mother, then you are not at ease. And the problem becomes more complex: if she begins to behave like a mother, then too you are not at ease because she must behave like your wife.
A mother should never say, “Love me because I am your mother.” She must make her child love more persons. The more the child is “polygamous,” the more abundant his life will be. He will never feel fixed. Wherever he moves he will be able to love. Whomsoever he comes in contact with he will be able to love. Don’t tell him that a mother is to be loved or a sister is to be loved or a brother is to be loved. Don’t tell him: “He is a stranger, so you need not love him. He doesn’t belong to our family, he doesn’t belong to our religion, he doesn’t belong to our country, so don’t love him.” You are crippling the child. Tell him, “To love is bliss – so go on loving. The more you love, the more you will grow.” A person who can love more is more enriched.
We are all poor. We are all poor because we cannot love. This is a fact: that if you love more persons, you become capable of loving anyone. If you love only one person, in the end you will not be capable of even loving that one, because your capacity to love will be so narrowed down that it will freeze. It is as if we are telling a tree to cut all the roots and let there be only one root. If you tell the tree, “Let there be only one root for your love. Let this be your only love – get everything from this root,” the tree is going to die.
We have created a monogamous mind, not loving. That’s why there are so many wars, so much cruelty, so much violence, in many, many names – religion, politics, ideology. Any nonsense will do as long as you find something to be violent about. And then see how people become sharp: their eyes look brilliant when there is war, when everyone is just freed from the taboo against killing. Then you can kill anybody. So you feel more joy when you kill someone – you never feel joy when you love someone.
Go and see in Bangladesh how joyful they are. Go and see anywhere where there is much killing: see the joy. And when there is no killing, see the limpness, the sluggishness, the lusterless eyes. No one is at ease; life is just meaningless. Create a situation for somebody to kill someone, and everyone is alive. Why? – we have atrophied the capacity to love. A child is capable of loving anyone, a child is born to love the whole world, a child is born to love everything, a child is born to love the whole universe – with such a big capacity that if you narrow it down then the child has begun to die from that very moment.
But why this monopoly? Why this possessive attitude? It is a vicious circle: the mother is not fulfilled herself. She has not loved, she has not been loved, so now she becomes possessive of her child. At least she must turn the child’s love totally to herself. It must not go anywhere. She must break all possible roots. The child must belong totally to her. This is violence, this is not love. Psychologists say that the beginning seven years are the most basic. Once something has been done it is next to impossible to undo it again – really impossible to undo it, because it has become the basic structure, the foundation of the child. Now he will do everything based on this structure; this structure will have come to be the basis of his life. So allow everyone to be nonpossessive, loving more – without any conditions, without any qualifications.
This should not mean that because someone is lovable then love him. Rather, the emphasis should be: you be loving. Love in itself is beautiful and very deeply fulfilling – so love. Whatsoever you feel, wherever you feel, love. This fluidity of love will make you conscious of greater life, and that greater life leads you to the divine.
Love is the foundation of prayer. Unless you have loved and loved abundantly, how can you pray? How can you feel grateful? For what can you feel grateful? What is there to feel grateful about? If you have not loved, what is there to feel grateful to existence for? So life is the beginning, love is the peak, and if you have loved, suddenly you become aware of a very love-filled universe. If you have not loved, then everywhere there is hate, jealousy. But up to now our emphasis has always been: you must get love. So everyone feels frustrated when he is not getting love, and no one feels frustrated when he is not giving love. The real emphasis must be you must give love, not get love. Everyone is trying to snatch love from somewhere. It cannot be snatched. You can just give. You can just go on giving. And life is not indifferent, if you give, life returns thousandfold. But you must not be concerned with returning; you must go on giving.
So every child should be trained more for love and less for mathematics and calculations and geography and history. He must be trained more for love, because geography is not going to be the peak, neither is mathematics going to be the peak, nor knowing history, nor technology. Nothing is comparable to love. Love is going to be the peak. If you miss love but everything else is there, you will be just a vacant waste, just emptiness. Then anxiety is created.
So the second thing I say: love must be deeply ingrained. No effort should be avoided which can lead a child to be more loving. But our structure will not allow it because we are afraid. If a person begins to love more, then what will happen to marriage? What will happen to this and that? We are concerned. Really, we never think of what is happening to marriage. What is marriage now, or what has it ever been? – just a painful suffering, a long suffering, with false smiling faces. It has simply proved to be a misery. At the most it can be just a convenience.
When I say this, I don’t mean that if you can love more people you will not go into marriage. As far as I see, a person who can love more will not go into marriage only for love. He will go into marriage for deeper things. Please understand me: if a person loves many people, then there is no reason to marry someone only because of love – because he can love many people without marriage, so there is no reason. We have forced everyone to go into marriage because of love. Because you cannot love outside it, so we have unnecessarily forced love and marriage to be together – unnecessarily. Marriage is for deeper things – even more deep: for intimacy, for a “co-inherence,” to work on something which cannot be done alone, which can be done together, which needs a togetherness, a deep togetherness. Because of this love-starved society, we fall into marriage out of romantic love.
Love can never really be a great base for marriage because love is fun and play. If you marry someone for love you will be frustrated, because soon the fun is gone, the newness is gone, and boredom sets in. Marriage is for deep friendship, deep intimacy. Love is implied in it, but it is not alone. So marriage is spiritual. It is spiritual. There are many things which you can never develop alone. Even your own growth needs someone to respond, someone so intimate that you can open yourself totally to him or her.
Marriage is not sexual at all. We have forced it to be sexual. Sex may be there, it may not be there. Marriage is a deep spiritual communion, and if such a marriage happens then we give birth to very different souls, very qualitatively different souls. When a child is born out of this intimacy, he can have a spiritual base. But our marriages are just sexual – just a sexual arrangement – and out of this arrangement, of course, what can be born? Either our marriages are a sexual arrangement or they are for momentary romantic love.
Really, romantic love is ill; because you cannot love many, you go on accumulating the capacity to love. Then you are overflooded with it. Then whenever you find someone and the opportunity, this overflooded love is projected. So an ordinary woman becomes like an angel, an ordinary man becomes divine, looks divine, like a god. But when the flood has gone and you have become normal, then you see that you have been deceived. He is just an ordinary man and she is just an ordinary woman.
This romantic madness is created by our monogamous training. If a person is allowed to love, he never accumulates tensions which can be projected. So romance is possible only in a very diseased society. In a really healthy society there will be no romance; there will be love, but no romance. If there is no romance, then marriage will be on a deeper level more intimate togetherness – for an I-thou relationship, so that you can and it will never be frustrating. And if marriage is not only for love but for both grow not as “I”s but as a “we” – then marriage is really a training for egolessness. But we don’t know about that kind of marriage at all. Whatsoever we know is just ugliness, just painted faces and everything dead within.
And finally: a child must be trained positively, never negatively. A positive emphasis must be there in everything, only then can a child really grow and become an individual. What do I mean by “positive emphasis”? Our emphasis is always negative. You say, “I can love someone, but I cannot love all.” This is a negative training. On the contrary, you should be able to say, “I can love all, only not this one.” The loving capacity must go for many. Of course there are individuals you cannot love, so don’t force yourself to love them. But your emphasis now is that “I can love only one.” Majnu says, “I only love Laila. I cannot love anyone else.” This is negative. The whole world is denied. A positive attitude will be this: Positively, “I cannot love this one, but I can love the whole world.”
Always think of greater positiveness in every realm. If I am negative in my attitudes, then I am surrounded by my own negativities, I see negations everywhere: “This man is not good because he lies” – but even if he lies, he is not just lies. He is more than that. Why not look to the greater part? Why be emphatically concerned with lies? And we say, “That man is a thief” – but even if a man is a thief, he is more than that. Even a thief can have positive qualities, and, really, he has them – because without some positive qualities you cannot even be a thief. So why not be emphatically concerned with his positive qualities?
A thief is courageous, so why not be concerned with his courage? Why not appreciate courage? Even a person who speaks lies is intelligent, because you cannot speak lies if you are not intelligent. Lies require a deep intelligence which truth never requires. You can be just an idiot and you can speak the truth, but to speak lies you need intelligence, a cleverness and a wider range of consciousness – because if you speak one lie you will have to speak a hundred, and then you will have to remember them all. So why not be concerned with the positive qualities? Why emphasize negatives!
But our society has created negative minds. You can find negativity in anyone. It is bound to be there because life cannot exist only with positives. Negatives are needed: they balance. So there are negatives, and if you train children for negatives, they will live their entire lives in a negative universe. Everyone will be bad, and when everyone is bad you begin to feel egoistic – only you are good.
So we train our children to find faults with everything. Then they begin to be “good.” We force them to be good, and then they feel that everyone is bad. But how can someone be good in a bad world? It is not possible. You can be good only in a good world. A good society can only have a positive mind. So bring out the positivity of the mind. Even if there is something negative, always try to see something positive in it – there is bound to be. And if a child becomes capable of seeing the positive even in the negative, then you have given him something. He will be happy. If you have given him a negative mind and he becomes capable of finding the negative in everything positive, you have created hell for him. His whole life he is going to be in hell.
Heaven is to live in a positive world; hell is to live in a negative world. This whole earth has become a hell because of negative minds. The mother cannot say to her child, “That woman is beautiful.” How can she say it? Only she is beautiful; no one else is. A husband cannot say to his wife, “Look! That woman passing on the street – how beautiful.” He cannot say it. He says it, but inside. If the wife is with him, he is even afraid to say it inside. A husband moving with his wife is really afraid to look here and there. He cannot look. That’s why he is never ready to move with his wife, it is such a hell. But why? If someone is beautiful why not tell it?
A mother cannot listen to her child reporting that someone is beautiful. She will try to make him feel that only she is beautiful and the whole world is ugly. Ultimately the child will find that his mother is the ugliest, because how can you create beauty in an ugly world? So a father goes on training him, a teacher goes on saying, “Only I am the possessor of truth.”
Someone was here only two days ago and she told me. “I want to listen to you, but my guru says: ‘This is sin. You belong to me, so how can you go anywhere else? When I can give you the truth, what is the need?’” Sooner or later this guru cannot remain a guru, cannot remain a teacher, because he is teaching negativity. This negativity is bound to rebound on him ultimately.
In Zen, teachers will send their disciples to their opponents. Someone will remain with a teacher for one year, and when he is ready the teacher will say, “Now you go to my opponent – because I have said something, he can say the remaining, the other part. So you go.”
This teacher will always be remembered as a teacher; you can never disrespect him. How can you disrespect him? He sends you to his opponent just so you can find the other part: “I have told you something, but this is not the whole.” No one can tell the whole – mm? – the whole is so big.
So create a positive attitude, and a better world can come out of it. But this is very rudimentary – this is a very complex subject, so sometime we will discuss it more.

============================================================

Unmani bhaavah paadyam

The upward flow of the mind
is paadyam – the water for divine worship.
The mind is the bridge between matter and consciousness, between without and within, between the gross and the subtle. When I say mind is the bridge, I mean many things. Man comes to the world through mind; man comes to the body through mind; man comes to desires through mind. So wherever you reach, the reaching is always through the mind. If you create a hell for yourself, you create it through mind. If you create a heaven, that is also through mind.
One of the Zen patriarchs, Hui-Hai, has said, “Mind is heaven and mind is hell.” So whatsoever you are or whatsoever you can be, it will depend ultimately on how your mind works. This working can create something for you which is not; this working can reveal to you that which is. So a mind can create a very illusionary world around it: it is capable. It can dream, and its dream can be so real that you cannot even detect that whatsoever is seen and perceived is not real.
So mind has a projective force; it can project. Mind can create that which is not, and because mind can create that which is not, it can forget that which is. It can just be in such a state that the reality is never in any contact with it; and whatsoever happens, it depends only on the mind. So the mind has to be taken as the root of everything that one can experience. Even if one has to know the divine, one has to go through mind. Of course, that “going” is difficult, because that “going” implies the dropping of the mind. Even if dropping of the mind is needed, it is through mind. Unless you drop the mind you will never be able to know the truth.
Mind is everywhere, either positively or negatively. Whatsoever you are doing – creating an illusory world or discovering the real, creating a madness for yourself or creating a meditative state – it is all through mind. Wherever you go, you go through the bridge of the mind. Even if you have to come to your Self it will be through mind. Of course, the coming will be negative; you will have to negate mind. You will have to come back, and the same steps will have to be taken, only the direction will be different. If I go from my home, there are steps which lead me away from it. If I am returning, the same steps will lead me back – only the direction will be different. So if you can understand how mind goes out, you know that the same path has to be followed back.
Secondly, in Indian symbology, “upward” is synonymous with “inward,” and “downward” is synonymous with “outward.” When we say upward we mean inward; they both mean the same. The more inward you go, the more upward; the more outward you go, the more downward. These two are different symbols. The Chinese mind has always used “downward” as synonymous with “inward,” and “upward” as synonymous with “outward.” So whenever Lao Tzu would speak he would never use upward; he would say, “Come downward,” and by down he means come within. So the within for Lao Tzu is just like an abyss: you fall in.
Indian symbology is different. We use upward for inward. For us the inward is not like an abyss, it is like a peak. Both can be used because symbols are just symbols, they indicate; more than that is meaningless. So it has always been a problem. The Upanishads always talk of upward, and the symbol is fire – fire constantly running upward. For Lao Tzu and Taoists, water is the symbol – water running downward, finding out the most downward position possible. It can rest only when the deepest abyss has been found. But fire will rest only with the sun. It will go upward, upward, to the invisible upwardness.
There is no contradiction. Really, whenever persons like Lao Tzu or Zarathustra or Jesus speak, they may use contradictory terms but they are never contradictory. They cannot be, that is impossible. So if their words are contradictory that only shows their type, their choice, their individuality, their way of saying things, nothing more. But pundits, scholars, can make much out of these apparent contradictions. Whenever we are talking about the absolute, the ultimate, one thing must be understood very clearly: you can use either of the extremes to express it, and each extreme is as valid as the other.
For example, the Upanishads use for the divine the word absolute. This is one extreme, that of positivity – the perfect, the absolute. Buddha uses for that same state and the same realization “nothingness” – the other extreme. Totally opposite as far as words go, but as far as the realization is concerned they both mean the same. But it created much confusion.
Buddha appeared to be absolutely contradictory to the Hindu mind. He was not. He was one of the purest Hindus possible, but he used a negative word. That was his liking, and it is good not to discuss likings, because one is as valid or as invalid as the other. Both can be used. Either you say “the infinite” or you say “the zero” – both are infinite. If you take it in the beginning, it is zero. If you take it in the end, it is infinite. Both mean the same thing.
Just like this, Buddha and Mahavira, both contemporaries, used very contradictory language. Mahavira says, “To know the Self is the ultimate knowledge, the wisdom. To know the Self is the wisdom.” And Buddha says, “To believe in the self is the only ignorance.” Mahavira says, “Only the Self is,” and Buddha says, “Only the self is the deception, the most false thing.” Nothing can be more contradictory – so Jainas and Buddhists have been fighting constantly for twenty-five centuries. But the whole conflict is based just on linguistic fallacies – because Mahavira uses the word “Self,” negating everything of the ego in it. He says, “You become the Self when there is no ego.” So really, “Self” becomes just like “no-self.” If there is no ego, the Self becomes just like no-self. And Buddha uses the “self” as the ego and he says the self means the ego, so the most perfect ego means “the self.” Then the meaning becomes clear. So both are right. When Buddha says, “To believe in a self is to be ignorant,” he is right. Mahavira is also right when he says, “To know the Self is the ultimate wisdom.” The contradiction is just apparent.
Lao Tzu says, “To go down to the last is to reach the basic existence.” He begins from the beginning: “Drop down back to the very beginning, to the original source. The original source is deep down.” The Upanishads say, “Go up to the last where the peak is achieved.” Lao Tzu says, “Go down to the original source,” and the Upanishads say, “Go up to the ultimate possibility, to the very end. Achieve the potentiality to the very end; make the potentiality absolutely actual.” The beginning and end are not two separate things. Really, no end can end unless it reaches again to the beginning, and the beginning begins only where the end ends.
Life moves in a circle, so if you begin a circle, the point of beginning will also be the point of the ending. Life moves in a circle, so you can say the same point is both the beginning and the end. So the upward is not contradictory to the downward. The Lao Tzu-an downward and the Upanishadic upward – both mean the same. Only the words differ.
If we can penetrate to the meaning beyond the words, only then can we conceive of and comprehend these minds. These minds are living in such experiences which cannot really be expressed through ordinary words. But they have to use ordinary words, so they can use only ordinary words with a very different meaning, with a very different connotation. So one thing more: when the Upanishads say upward, remember, it is the same as inward. The more you go in, the more up, and vice versa: the more up you go, the more in. What is this upwardness or inwardness? Why should the sutra say that this upward flow of the mind is the only water by which you can worship the feet of the divine? So many things are implied. One is that it is useless to use just water – it is useless!

Al-Hillaj Mansoor, a Sufi mystic, was killed. When his hands were cut off, blood began to flow, and he used that blood as Mohammedans use water for wazu – cleaning the body before going to the worship. They use water, but Mansoor used blood. When he made the gesture of wazu, someone asked from the crowd, “Mansoor, have you gone mad? What are you doing?”
Mansoor said, “For the first time I am doing wazu, cleaning myself with my own blood – because how can you clean yourself with water?”

He gives a deeper significance. Really, he means that unless you die, how can you purify yourself for the prayer? Wazu, through blood, means dying. Only dying can be a real cleansing, a real purity. And when you die, you become able to pray. Unless you die, you cannot pray. So the courage to die becomes a basic requirement for prayer.
This sutra says, “The upward flow of the mind is the water for the divine feet.” No other water will do. It goes even deeper than Mansoor’s blood, because blood is not so deep, it is only skin-deep. You can do wazu with your blood; it is not so deep yet. But the upward-flowing mind is the deepest possibility, for two reasons: because, basically, the mind is downward flowing; basically, the trend is to flow downward because it is easy. The downward flow is always easy. The upward needs effort, the upward needs a fight with the gravitation, the upward means austerity. You cannot flow upward unless you change your nature completely. It is a transformation. The downward flow is but natural, it is in the very nature of things. So mind naturally has a downward flow.
Think of it in this way: if you want to think and concentrate on the divine you will feel much difficulty. The mind will be wavering constantly. You will not be able to concentrate even for a single moment, really. It will be going here and there. Concentration will not be possible, contemplation will not be possible, meditation will not be possible. Mind will not be ready. Even with much effort you will find it is not coming to the divine, towards the divine. But think of sex, and mind is absorbed. No need to concentrate – it concentrates. No need to make any effort, mind flows easily.
Really, we don’t know anything else except sex by which we can understand what concentration means. So it always happens that whenever a person can concentrate on any other thing, sex will not be a problem for him – whenever! Even if he is just a scientist, a research-worker working in his lab, if he can concentrate on his work then sex will not be a problem in his life at all. But if you cannot concentrate on anything else, then your mind will constantly be flowing through the channel of sex.
One thing must be understood: when you are thinking about sex you are totally absorbed, there is no wavering. You even forget that you are thinking about sex. You may remember afterwards. Even this much wavering is not there. You forget that you are different and that this procession of sexual thoughts and images is different, you become one with them. This is what is meant when bhaktas say, “The constant remembering of the divine – without “you,” without “I.” The same phenomenon occurs, only the object changes. It is not sex now; the object becomes the divine. And unless the divine becomes as absorbing as sex naturally is, you cannot flow upward.
So the upward flow is an effort: you have to pull yourself together for it. The downward flow is easy. That’s why, whenever you feel tense, sex becomes a relaxation, a relief – because every tension means that you have been pulling yourself together towards something which is not natural. Then if you can relax to the downward flow you will feel a relief. So in the West particularly, sex has become just a relief, just a relief from tensions. It is, and it is because when you flow downward no effort is needed. So sex is used by many – really by ninety-nine percent of people – as a tranquilizer. If you move in sex then you can sleep well. Why? – because when the mind is flowing downward your whole body is relaxed. Unless you are relaxed in the same way when your mind is going upward, you are not a religious person at all.
That is the difference between a secular mind and a religious mind. A secular mind is at ease with downward flowing, relaxed. A religious mind is only relaxed when upward flowing. Whenever a religious mind has to flow downward it becomes tense. Ultimately, when the upward flow is achieved, the same effort will be needed to flow downward – even more effort, because upwardness, even when arduous, is still upwardness, and downwardness, even with no effort, is downwardness. And when one has to come down with effort, the effort becomes a thousandfold more arduous.
For a person like Ramakrishna, even to eat is an effort. For a person like Buddha, even to move is an effort, even to be in the body is an effort. This effort means that the whole nature has become transformed. That which was downward before has now become upward, and that which was upward before has become downward. A religious mind flows upward as if the upwardness has just become downwardness. Meera is at ease when she is dancing and singing for Krishna, but when her husband Rana is there she is not at ease, because now Rana is a downward flow. This upward flow is bound to be an effort for us. Unless you will it, you will not achieve it.
Now again, you will find a conflict between Tao and the Upanishads. Lao Tzu says, “Effortlessness is the means,” and the Upanishads say, “Effort, total effort, is the means.” When Lao Tzu says “effortlessness,” he means be so still that there is not a single movement, because any effort is a movement, any effort is a tension, any effort means that you are outside. So when Lao Tzu says “effortlessness,” he is using it to mean an absolutely relaxed state of mind – do not do anything.
It is not so easy. It is as difficult as the upward flow – rather, even more difficult, because we can understand terms which imply doing, but we cannot understand terms which imply nondoing. Nondoing is for us more arduous, but both are arduous and both try through different ways to achieve the same point. If you become totally effortless, you achieve your innermost center – because you cannot move! When there is no movement you will drop down, down, down to the center. Every peripheral event is an effort. When there is no effort, you will be down in your ultimate center.
The Upanishads again use a different way which is, of course, in logical relationship with their concept of upwardness. They say, absolute effort is needed. When you make an absolute effort you will become more tense, more tense, more tense, and there will come a moment when you will be nothing but tension. You will be nothing but tension! Then there is nothing further. The ultimate has been achieved. Now you are just a tension. When this climax comes, suddenly you will fall from the climax. You cannot go further; you have come to the last limit. The tension has come to its ultimate, the maximum, it cannot go further. When tension comes to a total climax you suddenly relax and you reach the point which is meant by Tao, by Lao Tzu – effortlessness. You come to the center.
So there are two ways: either relax directly as Tao implies, or relax indirectly as the Upanishads say. Create the tension to its ultimate, and then there will be relaxation. I think the Upanishads are more helpful because we are tense and we understand the meaning, the language, the ways of tension. Tell someone suddenly to relax and he cannot. Even relaxation becomes a new tension for him. I have seen a book which is entitled You Must Relax. The very “must” will create tension. The word is anti-relaxation – “must.” It becomes hard work: you must relax. So try now to relax, and your very effort to relax will create more tensions. The title should rather be You Must Not Relax – if you want to relax.
Relaxation cannot come directly to us. We are tense, so tense. Relaxation doesn’t mean anything; we have not known it. Lao Tzu is right, but to follow him is very difficult. He looks simple. Always remember – whenever something looks very simple it must be very complex, because in this world the most simple is the most complex, and because it looks simple you may deceive yourself. So I can say, “Just relax!” – it will not happen.
I was working for ten years continuously with Lao Tzuan methods, so I was continuously teaching direct relaxation. It was simple for me, so I thought it would be simple for everyone. Then, by and by, I became aware that it is impossible. I was in a fallacy: it was not possible. I would say, “Relax” to those I was teaching. They would appear to understand the meaning of the word, but they could not relax. Then I had to devise new methods for meditation which create tension first – more tension. They create such tension that you become just mad. And then I say, “Relax.”
When you have come up to the climax your whole body, your whole mind, becomes hungry for relaxation. With so much tension you want to stop, and I go on pushing you to continue, continue to the very end. Do whatsoever you can do to create tensions, and then, when you stop, you just fall down from the peak into a deep abyss. The abyss is the end, the effortlessness is the end, but the Upanishads use tension as the means.
So be effortful to flow upward. Really, to use the word flow is not good because flow means downward. How can you flow upward? You have to struggle. To flow upward means a struggle, constant struggle. A moment is missed and you will find you are downward. You stop the struggle for a moment and you will be flowing downward. It is a constant struggle against the current. So now understand what the current is and against what current you have to struggle upward.
Your habits are the current. Long habits, habits generated by many, many lives; not only human lives – animal lives, vegetable lives. You are not isolated, you are part of a long succession, and every habit is just ingrained. You have been flowing downward continuously for millennia, so it has become a deep habit. Really, it has become your nature. You don’t know any other nature. You know only one nature which goes down and down and down. This downwardness is the current, and every cell of the body, every atom of the mind, is just part of a long, long succession of habits. They are so deep that we don’t even remember from where they came.
Now Western psychology has come to discover many, many new things. For example, now they have discovered that whenever you feel violence, your violence is not in the mind alone, it is deep in your teeth and in your nails. So if you suppress violence, your teeth will absorb it and your jaw will become diseased because animals, whenever violent, use teeth and nails. Our nails belong to animality, our teeth belong to animality – a long animal heritage. So when someone is violent and suppresses it, the teeth become loaded.
Now they say that many diseases of the teeth are just because so much violence is suppressed – many diseases of the teeth. So a violent man has a different type of jaw. Just by seeing his jaw you can say that he is violent. A person who has suppressed many, many violent fevers, upheavals, will begin to have a particular type of jaw – the violence will be there. One psychologist, Wilhelm Reich, would just push your teeth by his hands, press your teeth by his hands, and suddenly your whole body would become violent.
Wilhelm Reich had to be continuously guarded against his patients because he would push, manipulate and reactivate hidden violences just by touching. He became an expert. Simply by touching a particular part in the jaw and teeth he would bring many, many violences back to you which even you would not remember. You would begin to scream, attack. He would say, “Now I have touched a built-in program. A built-in program has been touched and reactivated.”
Sometimes it happened, when Reich would push particular spots – and he became aware of them by continuously working for forty years on jaw spots, he became aware that every spot had a particular type of violence hidden in it – so he would push a particular spot, a particular chakra in the jaw, and a particular violence would come out. He became capable of pushing you back so much that you would become just an animal. Sometimes it happened that the patient would again not be a human being at all. He would fall back, be reduced to an animal. He would begin to roar like an animal, attack like an animal.
This is the current. When you are violent, you alone are not violent; your whole history is violent. When you are sexual, you alone are not sexual; the whole history is sexual, the whole succession. That’s why it has so much force. You are just a dead leaf in a big current. So what to do so that you can go upward against the current? What to do?
Three things to be done: one, whenever mind begins to flow downward become aware of it as early as possible – as early as possible! Someone has insulted you. For you to become angry, a little time is needed because it is a mechanism. You will get angry, but after a gap. Things will happen like a flash. First you will feel insulted. The moment you feel insulted, the second current will begin to flow; you will become angry. At first the anger will not be conscious; at first it will be just like a fever. Then it will become conscious. Then you will begin to express or suppress it.
So when I say, “The earlier the better,” I mean when someone insults you become aware as soon as you begin to feel that you have been insulted. Whenever you become aware, just make an effort to stop. Don’t fall into the automatic track even for a single moment. Even a single moment’s stop will help much. Longer stops will help even more.

When Gurdjieff’s father was dying he called his boy. He was just nine, and Gurdjieff remembered the incident all his life. The father called him. He was the youngest child and the father said, “I am so poor I cannot give you anything, my boy. But one thing I can give you which my father gave to me. You may not even be able to understand what it means now, because I myself was not able to understand what it meant when my father gave it to me. But it proved the most precious thing in my life, so I am just giving it to you. Preserve it. Sometime you may begin to understand it.”
So Gurdjieff just listened. The father said, “Whenever you feel angry, never reply before twenty-four hours. Reply, but let there be a gap of twenty-four hours.”
Gurdjieff followed his dying father’s advice. It became deeply impressed in his mind the very day his father died, and Gurdjieff said, “I have practiced many, many, many spiritual exercises, but that was the best. I never could be angry in my life, and that changed the whole flow, the whole current, because I had to stick to the promise. Whenever someone would insult me I would create something, some situation. I would just tell him that I would come back after twenty-four hours to reply, and I have never replied because it proved such nonsense to reply.” Only a gap was needed, and the whole life of George Gurdjieff became something different.

So even if you can begin with one thing in the current, you will begin to change the whole. Really, this is one of the basic truths of esoteric religion: that you cannot change a part unless you change the whole. It works both ways. Either you change the whole, then the part will change; or you change even a single part totally and the whole will follow, because they are so integratedly related.
So begin anywhere. Find out your chief characteristic. Find out the chief characteristic for you: that which is most forceful, which you cannot resist, that which tempts you and causes you to go down. It may be sadness, it may be anger, it may be greed, it may be anything. Find out your chief characteristic, your weakness. And begin with the stronger one, then the weaker ones can be won very easily. Begin with the strongest. If anger is the strongest, begin with anger. First, when you feel that you have been insulted, you have been rejected, you have been hindered – anything which creates anger – just when you feel that “Now the first step has been taken and I am feeling insulted,” stop for a moment. Don’t breathe: just stop the breath wherever it is. If it is out, let it be out. If it is in, let it be in. Stop breathing for a moment, then release the breath. Go in, and find out whether you have missed the thing or it is still there.
You will have missed it. The connection is missed. You will have given a gap to the automatic working. Somewhere you have disjoined the mechanism, and breathing is wonderful to disjoin anything. Just stop breathing, and there is a disjoining inside. Your feeling insulted and the mechanism of anger will not be joined. If they are missed even for a single moment, they are missed. Your mechanism will never know that you have been insulted.
The earlier this happens, the better. There are even earlier stages: they belong to the other, not to you. When the other is insulting you, before feeling insulted, look at him and feel that he is angry. Stop your breath and look at him again, and you will not be insulted. He will insult you, but you will not be insulted. You will not feel insulted because again there comes a gap. This gap is between him and you. Now he cannot cross this gap; he cannot insult you. He will insult, but somewhere he has missed you, you are not the target now. For him you are the target, but actually you are not. You can laugh, and if you laugh it is better.
So first create a gap. Second: do something which is ordinarily never done in such situations. When someone is insulting no one laughs, no one smiles, no one thanks, no one hugs, embraces. Do something which is never done. Then you are against the current, because the current is always that which is done, that which is usually done. This is what the current means. Be unusual. Someone is beating you: laugh and feel the difference – not only in those who are beating you, but within yourself. If you can laugh you will feel totally different. Try it – something absurd. Then you disconnect the whole mechanism, you confuse the whole mechanism, because the mechanism cannot understand what is happening. A mechanism is just a mechanism. It may be very deep-rooted, but it is mechanical, it has no consciousness. So confuse your animal. Don’t allow him to push and pull and manipulate. Confuse the animal! The more you confuse him, the less powerful he becomes – and by “animal” I mean your past.
This is a rare experiment: to do something which is never done. When you are happy, do something which is never done in happiness – be sad, act sad, be angry, act angry. Confuse the mechanism. Just don’t allow the mechanism to know everything that is to be done. Don’t allow, and within a year your mechanism will be at a loss. Someone will be insulting, and your mechanism will not know at all what to do. You have broken from your past. So try. Every moment can be an experiment, and you will feel a sudden change in your consciousness. When someone is insulting you, laugh and feel what is happening inside – something new you have never known.

I am reminded of a Zen monk, Rinzai. He is sleeping in his poor hut. A thief comes in at midnight, it is a full-moon night and a thief comes in. The light of the moon is coming in, the doors are open. There is no need to close the doors because he has nothing. He has only one blanket, in which he is asleep. So the thief goes around the hut and finds nothing.
Rinzai is awake. He feels very sorry for the thief because there is nothing. And he doesn’t want to disturb him either, because he can give the blanket – that is the only thing – but the thief will be disturbed, he may even run. So he suddenly laughs. The thief is stunned. Rinzai throws the blanket over him and runs away. The thief follows. What has happened? The whole thing has become just a confusion. So the thief follows him, catches him by the hand and asks him, “What are you doing?”
He says, “I am just confusing my mechanism. You are not concerned at all, don’t worry. It was just a coincidence that you came in. I was just experimenting with myself.”

What to do? Traditional answers are always ready. Use your fantasy, use your imagination, because your mechanism is the least imaginative thing – the least imaginative. It is very much traditional and orthodox. Understand what I am saying: it is orthodox, traditional. You have been angry the same way, always. Innovate something, use your imagination, be creative, and confuse the current. The more you are capable of confusing the current, the more you will transcend it.
So the second thing: use unusual expressions. Don’t allow the routine. The more you allow it, the more powerful it goes on becoming.
The thief I was mentioning just fell at the feet of Rinzai and he said, “If you can use such things, allow me to use them myself also. You ran like a thief, and you are the master of the house. You confounded me. I have been in many, many situations, but never like this. You have hypnotized me also. You are the first man who has not behaved with me as a thief, who has not thought about me as a thief, so I cannot leave you now. Everyone has tried with me that I should leave this profession, and I had my own reactions. But with you I change. Now initiate me into your path.”
Rinzai said, “How can I initiate you? Really, when I laughed, in that moment I became enlightened. When I laughed, I became enlightened. I was trying and trying and trying; I had been meditating for years and nothing had happened. But in that moment of laughter something broke down, something exploded, I became disconnected from myself. So you are my teacher, really – you have initiated me.”
Use something absolutely absurd such as Zen monks have been using. If you go to a Zen teacher, you can never conceive what his answer will be. If you go to a Hindu teacher, a Hindu guru, your question can show you what the answer is going to be, the answer is predictable. Whenever the answer is predictable it is useless – it is useless because it is routine. So if you go to a teacher you can know that if you ask “this,” he will answer “this.” But you can never know with a Zen teacher. Everything is possible, and nothing is impossible. He may answer, he may not answer. He may answer in such a way which is not at all connected with your question – not at all.
You may have asked, “Is there a God?” and a Zen teacher might answer, “Look. The sun has gone down. The evening is to come” – not related at all. Someone may ask, “What is a buddha?” and a Zen teacher might just beat you or throw you out of the window. Why? Really, they are not answering you. They are just trying to create a gap between your questioning mind and the answer – a gap.
If you ask, “Is there a God?” and I throw you out of the window, how can you relate these two? – no relation. If I answer, “There is no God,” it is related. If I say, “There is a God,” it is related. My theist answer, my atheist answer – all are related, they don’t create the gap. But if I begin to beat you or I just begin to dance, I just begin to laugh, just a mad laugh, it is not related. And if you can be unrelated, unhitched from your routine track, if you can be derailed from the track, something has happened. It has happened many times that the seeker is thrown out of the window and he comes back to touch the feet of the master and say, “Much has happened, and I never dreamed about it. My question was not even related, but you have replied to me.”
The first Zen teacher from India, Bodhidharma, went to China. He introduced Zen there. “Zen” is really the Chinese form of dhyan, meditation. “Dhyan” is Sanskrit, and the equivalent of dhyan in Pali, the Buddhist language, is zhan. So zhan in China became ch’an, then zen in Japan.
When Bodhidharma reached China, the Emperor Wu came to receive him. When he entered the boundary where he was to be received, there were many thousands of monks. No one could conceive that Bodhidharma would enter in such a way: one foot was naked; on one foot there was a shoe and another shoe was on his head. He entered with a shoe on his head.
The Emperor Wu was just bewildered: “What type of man is this? Is he mad?”
Wu became worried, and Bodhidharma laughed. Bodhi-dharma said, “You must be thinking the man is mad. I can predict you, but you cannot predict me: that is the difference. You must be thinking I am mad. You have not said so, but I can predict you. You cannot predict me: that is the difference.”
Become unpredictable: this is the second thing. If you are predictable you are a thing, not a person. The more unpredictable, the more you are not a thing – not just a thing among things – you become a person. So the second thing: against the current; be unpredictable. Sometimes be absurd. Just don’t try to be logical, because the current is logical. Remember this: the current is very logical – strictly logical. Everything is related. You insult me – I am angry. You appreciate me – I am happy. You call me good and I am one way; and you call me bad and I am different. Everything is predictable, it is logical.
Really, if you are angry and I don’t reply to you with anger you will feel something strange has happened, you will not be at ease. You will not be at ease because something illogical has come in. We live in a logical world. This current is very logical, mathematical; everything is fixed. Unfix it! Disturb it! Create a chaos. Create an inner anarchy. Only then can you throw the animal heritage. Animals are predictable and animals are very logical. To transcend them you must have the courage to be illogical, and that is the deepest courage – to be illogical.
Jesus says, “Those who have will be given more, and those who have not, even that will be taken away.” This is illogical. This is absolutely illogical. What does he mean? He is using some Zen words. If you look in the words of Buddha, Krishna, Lao Tzu, you will find that they are not logical. If you ask a buddha, “I will be good, virtuous, I will follow – what will I gain?” he will say, “Nothing! You will not gain anything – nothing.”
This Emperor Wu asked Bodhidharma, “I have donated millions for the purpose of Buddhism. I have opened many monasteries, ten thousand monks are fed daily in my palace, so what will be the result? What will I gain?”
And Bodhidharma said, “Nothing. And if you insist more, you may even fall down into hell. If you insist more, you may even fall down into the deepest hell.” It looks illogical.
Even the ten thousand monks were just afraid: “What is he saying? He may destroy the whole business” – because they were trying to persuade the emperor that he will get into a high heaven, that he will be just by the side of the divine emperor, the divine throne. He will be just by the side, and he will have a palace there. And whatsoever he is giving here, he will get back ten-thousandfold. But this man is destroying everything. He says, “Nothing.”
Bodhidharma is illogical; Wu is logical. Wu again asked, “Are you joking? – because I have done so much. Is it not holy?”
And Bodhidharma said, “There is nothing holy. The word holy is just empty. And if you insist more, you will fall down into a deep hell.”
The Emperor Wu said, “We have no communication between us. What you are saying I cannot understand, and what I am saying I think you are not hearing.”
Bodhidharma said, “Yes! How can there be communication between me and you? Either you come up or I must come down, only then can we meet somewhere. And I am not ready to come down; you try to come up.” But it didn’t happen, so Bodhidharma remained outside the empire and the emperor went back to his palace.
After ten years, when he was dying, the emperor remembered. When death came, every logical system was shattered. Then he became afraid of whether anything was going to happen because “I have fed these bhikkhus, and I have made so many temples and viharas and so many monasteries, but this death is there.” Then he remembered the monk, Bodhidharma, and he asked, “Bring him back. If he is found anywhere bring him back soon, because I am dying and death has shattered all my logic and rationality. Now only that man can help.”
But Bodhidharma was dead. He had died one year before, but he had left a message for the Emperor Wu and said to his disciples, “One day when he faces death he will remember me because I was just a death to him, to his whole expectation, to all his desires, to his whole fantasy about the other world. I was just a death to him. When death comes and when death shatters his hopes, he will remember me.” So he had left a message for Wu. That message was given. In the message it was written again, “You cannot predict me, but I can predict you. When you die you will remember me. I can even predict what you will remember when you die, because death is illogical.”
Really, if you can understand: life is illogical, death is illogical, love is illogical, God is illogical, and all that is logical is just marketplace. In this life everything that is meaningful, significant, deep, ultimate, is illogical. So create an illogical-ness inside. Don’t be too logical – then you can break…logic is the foundation of your old mind, your traditional mind. Illogic should be the beginning of the new mind.
And, thirdly, whenever you feel convenience, comfort, easiness, be alert, the mind is flowing downward. So don’t ask for inner comfort, otherwise you will be lost. Don’t ask for inner convenience, otherwise you will be lost. Whenever you feel everything is okay be alert, you are flowing downward – because nothing is okay really. So whenever you feel that everything is okay, nothing is to be done and everything is just flowing, everything is good, remember, you are flowing downward. Be aware of inner conveniences. When I say “comfort and convenience,” I mean inner ones. Outwardly it makes no difference, you may be in comfort outwardly – but inwardly never allow comfort to set in.
That’s why no one remembers religion when he feels happy. When you feel sorrow, when you feel sadness, when you feel misery, you begin to think about religion. Inconvenience inside must be used. So two things: first remember always that the downward flow is very convenient. Don’t be a victim to it. Always create some inner inconvenience. This is tap – inner inconvenience. This is tap – this is austerity. What do I mean by inner inconvenience?
You are sleeping, relaxed: create an inner inconvenience. Let the body relax, but don’t relax the alertness. Sufis have used vigil, night vigil, as an inner inconvenience. The whole night they will be on vigil. In India, sleep was never used, really – food and hunger were used as inner inconveniences. The hunger is there: don’t take food. The hunger is there: remember it, be aware of it, and yet be away from it. An inner inconvenience is created. The mind has a habit of falling for the convenience, so create any inner inconvenience. And always go on changing, because if you are fixed to one thing it will not be an inconvenience for long.
You can even become fixed to your fasting. Then it becomes a convenience rather than an inconvenience, because to take food may begin to appear as an inconvenience. Once you know that the body can run without food – the body begins to feel more light, the body begins to feel more alive, the body begins to feel more vital; and the body has a built-in process so that for at least three months you can be without food, without any food – after seven or eight days, to take food will be inconvenient. So use fasting as an inconvenience, and when fasting begins to settle, use food.
Gurdjieff was strange in this. He would give you such strange foods, such strange foods as you have never eaten. The whole stomach would be disturbed, and he would create inconvenience. Such strange foods – Chinese foods, Indian foods, Caucasian foods – he would use them in New York. Whenever he was traveling, a whole truck of strange foods would follow with him.
His followers were very much afraid because he would force them to eat so much that it became a torture. From eight in the night up to twelve – four hours would be for eating, and he would be there. He would go on forcing; no one could say no. He would force so much alcohol that ordinarily it would just make you deadly unconscious, but he would go on. He would create inner inconvenience and he would say, “Let the inconvenience be there. Remember. Be awake.” He would go on pouring alcohol, and he would say, “Remember! Remember, and be awake!”
Tantrics have used alcohol, and a real tantric can take any amount of it without being affected at all. They say, and they say rightly, that alcohol creates the deepest inconvenience inside. To fight with it and remain aware is the most arduous thing. When the alcohol goes in and every body cell becomes lethargic and the chemical begins to work and the mind begins to lose consciousness, then to be aware is the most arduous tap – austerity – possible. But it is possible, and once it happens you will never be the same again.
So create any inner inconvenience. The current always helps you to be convenient: that is the trick, then you begin to flow with it. So the third thing for the upward flow of the mind is to create inward inconvenience continuously, and go on changing. You can make anything a habit – go on changing. When something becomes convenient, leave it; create something new. Then, by these inconveniences, you create a crystallization inside. You become integrated, one. For this oneness, this integration, this chemical crystallization, alchemists use the word gold. Now the baser metal has been changed into higher. Now you are gold. This integration is the third point to remember.
So continuously be aware that some integration must take place. No moment should be missed in which you have not tried to integrate yourself. You are walking: a moment comes when your legs give way and they say, “Now you cannot move.” That is the point to move. Now move! Now don’t listen to the legs and you will become aware of a subtle force, because the body has two force reservoirs. One is just ordinary, for day-to-day use. Another, a deeper one, is infinite. It is not for everyday use, it only comes into operation when there is some emergency.
You are walking: you have walked twenty miles, and now you know very well, your logic says, your mind says, every fiber of the body says that now no movement is possible, you will just drop dead. A single step more, and you will drop dead. This is the moment: now move! Don’t listen to the body. Now run! Don’t listen to the body, and suddenly there will be an upsurge of energy again. Within moments you will feel a new energy, and now you can walk for miles together. This energy comes from the reservoir, and this reservoir is connected only when the day-to-day energy source is just empty. If you listen to the body then this reservoir is never used.
You are feeling sleepy, and now you cannot even open your eyes. This is the moment. Stand! Open your eyes! Stare! Don’t blink! Forget sleep and try to be awake, and within seconds a sudden upsurge of energy will overflow. There will be no sleep. You will be fresher than you have ever been in the morning. A new morning, an inside morning has happened. A deeper source energy has come. This is how to integrate your mind and how to let it be arrowed continuously upwards.
The rishi says, The upward flow of the mind is the water for divine worship – mm? No other water will do. This constant upward flow, by this and only by this can you worship the feet of the divine.

============================================================

Osho,
You said last night that to have an upward flow of the mind
one has to make a constant effort against past animal habits.
Please explain what the difference is between effort against habits,
and suppression.
Transformation of the mind is a positive effort. Suppression of the mind is negative. The difference is that when you are suppressing your mind you are positively concerned with being against something. When you are transforming your mind you are not directly concerned with being against something. You are positively concerned for something: the effort is for something, not against something.
For example, if you are fighting directly with sex, then it will be suppression. But if your positive effort is for transformation of sex energy, your positive effort is for something else, then it will not be suppression. Suppression means you have blocked the natural door for the energy, you have blocked the natural outflow, and you have not opened anything else. It is just a blockage. You are against anger, so you block anger – but where will the energy go? The energy that you have suppressed will create inner complexities. It will even be more perverted. So to be natural is better than to be perverted. Perversion is disease; to be natural is healthy.
Of course, just to be healthy is not the end. One can go even beyond health. So these are three things: suppression, being natural and transcendence. Just being natural is just being healthy. If you suppress and there is no positive outlet, no creative outlet for your suppressed energy, then you will become perverted. You are not healthy; you become diseased, you become a “dis-ease.”
Don’t be concerned negatively. Change the energy, the door, the path, the outlet, positively, and when there is a creative change, the energy that was flowing into sex will not flow. Whenever you can open a higher passage for it, it will flow through it. Whenever you can create something which is better than nature itself, then there is no suppression. This difference must be understood.
Only man can fall below nature; no animal can fall below nature. There are no abnormal animals. Sometimes animals also become abnormal, but only when they are with men, never alone. A dog can become abnormal, a horse can become abnormal – but never alone, never in their natural state. They can become abnormal with man, with man’s society. They can become abnormal in a zoo.
Man can fall down below nature. This may seem unfortunate. It is not, because this capacity comes with another capacity: man can transcend nature. No animal can transcend nature. The higher than nature you can go, the lower you can go also – in the same proportion. Every possibility is a double possibility. Every possibility opens two doors that are diametrically opposite. Unless you can fall below nature you cannot transcend above it. If you have the capacity to transcend nature you will have the capacity to fall below it also.
Animals are just natural; they are neither perverted nor are they transformed. Never do they become sub-animal, and never super-animal. They are just animals. Man is a flexible potentiality: he can fall below nature, can be perverted, can become mad. He can transcend nature, can become superhuman, can become a buddha.
Another thing: animals are born with their nature. In a way they are born perfect. An animal is born developed. Man is born without any nature and is not developed at the time of birth; he develops, then many possibilities open, and there is a great range of possibilities. Man is born undeveloped – not only mentally, but even bodily he is born undeveloped. No animal child is born with an undeveloped body; the body is complete. That’s why, when the animal child is born, he is capable of living even without parents.
But man’s child is born undeveloped, and even in the physiological structure many things develop only after he is born – and it takes years. In the mother’s womb he is not completely developed, and because of that the “mother” is born – because mothering continues. If the child were born completely developed then there would be no mothering. The whole institution of the family developed – and consequently the whole society, the whole society was born – because the child is born undeveloped. He has to be looked after, taken care of. Only after twenty years will he really be out of the womb. In these twenty years he will need a family, loving care, a society in which to develop. This will be a greater womb.
Even when he is physically complete, mentally he is not. He will have to develop his mind. Really, the average mind is never beyond fourteen years of age. The average mind, the average mental age, is thirteen and a half. A person who is physically seventy, is mentally thirteen and a half. The mind remains in such a primitive, primary state. Body becomes complete, mind remains incomplete, and spirit is not even touched. Man dies without ever having evolved any spirit.
Whenever someone asked Gurdjieff, “Have we souls?” he would say, “No. Sometimes it happens that a man has a soul. Only sometimes does it happen.” Gurdjieff would say, “Only sometimes, rarely does it happen that a man has a soul. You are not even complete minds, so how can you have a soul?”
A body incomplete cannot have a mind, a mind incomplete cannot have a soul, and a soul incomplete cannot realize the divine. Really, body works as a womb for the mind, and mind works as a womb for the spirit, then spirit works as a womb for godliness. So man is not born fixed, complete. He is born only as a multi-potentiality, and he can fall down – below nature. He can be more animalistic than any animal and he can be a superhuman being also, he can be just divine. There is this range of possibilities.
Now you can do two things. If your mind becomes negative, suppressive, you go on fighting things which are not “good.” So you fight sex, you fight anger, you fight greed, you fight jealousy, you fight violence – you go on fighting. But when a person is fighting violence he will never be nonviolent, because to fight violence one needs to be violent.
You cannot fight violence without being violent, so your so-called nonviolent saints are all violent – deeply violent. Of course, their violence is not against others, their violence is against themselves. So no one objects; you can even applaud them. They are against themselves – very violent. You cannot fight violence. How can you fight violence without being violent? How can you fight anger without being angry? The very attitude to fight anger is a subtle anger. The very fight means you are angry. You are not at ease with your anger.
You can take a negative attitude, and you can go on fighting with things which are there. The more you fight them, the more you become like them. A person fighting sex will become sexual, his every gesture will become sexual. His sitting, his standing, his walking, will become sexual. He will be so much obsessed with fighting it that everything will take the tinge and color of sex.
When you fight with something, you have to use the techniques of your enemy. If you want to win, you have to use the same techniques that your enemy is using. So even if you win in the end, you will not win because the techniques will be the same. Really, you will have been defeated. Fight with anger, and if you are defeated then there will be anger. If you win, then there will also be anger. Only anger wins against anger.
This negative fight will narrow down your consciousness more and more and you will become afraid of everything. A negative mind is always in fear. Everything becomes a sin and everything creates guilt and everything creates fear. You are just in a deep escape from everything. Your consciousness will be narrowed down; it will not expand. You will become so much afraid that you will just hide within yourself and everywhere, all around, will be the enemies. You have created them, because you became negative.
This is suppression, and you will end up in a madhouse. Everything that you have suppressed you will have to suppress continuously. The fight will be so continuous that you will not be able to do anything else. If you are fighting sex, then it will be enough – your whole life will be just a fight. If you are fighting greed, then it will be enough; even greed itself will not take as much energy as the fight with greed. Sex will not take as much energy, it will not dissipate as much energy, as fighting with sex – because sex is just natural, and the fight creates negativity. Whenever you are negative you only dissipate energy. Nothing is gained, nothing creative is achieved. You become self-destructive.
So always remember never to be negative; then there will be no suppression. But I have told you that to go against the current is the way for the mind to flow upward. What do I mean by going against the current? The difference is very subtle, but once felt, you can never lose the track.
For example, you are swimming in a river against the current. The possibilities are two: one, you are just fighting the river, just fearful of being taken away by the river – taken down, taken in the flow – just afraid, trembling, fighting against the river. You will be defeated, because this very attitude of fear of being taken away and this trembling mind cannot win. The defeat has set in. How long will you be able to fight the current? The whole attitude is negative, the river is very much positive, life-like, and you are just fear and trembling. How can you win? Sooner or later you will dissipate energy in the fight and the current will take you away.
There is a second point, another dimension: you are not fighting the river because you are not fearful of it.
The first thing: fight is created because of fear. Remember, fight means fear; fear comes first, then you begin to fight. Your fear creates fight, your fear creates the foe. So basically, fear is at the root.
The second point: you are not fighting the river because you are not fearful of the river. You are not fearful of the river because you know that this is just natural, that the river flows downward. Even if you flow downward there is no guilt, it is natural. Even if you flow downward it is not a defeat. It is a defeat only if you fight – then it becomes defeat. It is just natural: the river flows downward and you flow with it. You can even enjoy it. You can feel the bliss of the flowing river – without any effort, just moving with the current, and the current takes you away. You can even conserve energy by flowing down naturally.
So the first thing: don’t be fearful of a downward flow, don’t be fearful. Remember, it is natural, and it is better to flow with the current than to be defeated and taken away because then the whole thing will lose the bliss that is possible naturally. So the first thing: to be natural is not a sin. Remember, because only then can the whole effort become positive; otherwise it will be negative.
To be natural is not a sin. Of course, it is not enough – mm? – that is another thing. But it is not a sin. If you are flowing naturally, that is okay. As far as it goes, it is okay. It is not a sin, it is not a guilt, it is not immoral, it is just healthy. But I say it is not enough. It is not enough because your possibilities are still more. They are not just to be healthy. You can be holy also.
So don’t be in fear – first thing. Don’t be in condemnation of nature, and then the negative attitude will not be there.
Now don’t fight the current – play with the current. You are not fighting the river really, you are just training yourself to go upward. Feel the difference: you are not fighting the river, you are just filled with an abundance, you are just filled with energy and training the energy to go upward. Now the river is not an enemy. Rather, it is a friend, because it gives you the opportunity to go up, to play with it. Now the fight is not a fight at all. It is a game, it is a play. The river is not your enemy it is a situation. Life is a situation, it is not an enemy. Nature is a situation, it is not an enemy. It is an opportunity.
So try to train your inner energy to flow upward. You are not really concerned with the river going downward, you are concerned with a different river of energy going upward. Your mind is basically concerned with the inner energy, which can go upward.
Feel thankful for the river because it gives you a background, it gives you an opportunity, it helps you, it cooperates with you. You can weigh yourself only through its current. You can feel yourself only because the river is going downward. The feeling that you can go upward even when the river is flowing down gives you a very different quality of confidence – you can go up-ward. Now, even if you relax and flow with the river, you know very well that you can go upward. Now, even this downward flow with the river is not a defeat. You have known something – something different from nature.
If you have glimpsed something different from nature even for a single moment, then you have known your potentiality. You may achieve it, you may not achieve it, but now you are not just part of the downward flow, the upward flow is possible. Now it will depend on you. You will be the decisive factor, not the downward current. Now there is no enmity. If the river flows downward, it is okay. You need not flow, you need not fight, you need not be in fear. You can go up.
Ultimately, there is another possibility which tantra has gone into very deeply. Tantra says there is a possibility that you flow downward with the river and still you flow upward. Then only your body is carried away. How can the river carry you away? – it can carry only the body. Tantra tried to create many downward rivers. So go into the river, feel the downward flow, flow with it, and remember constantly that you are not flowing.
I was saying that by fighting with sex you may be obsessed with sex totally. There is another possibility: even going deeply in sex, you may not be sexual at all. But that possibility opens only when your effort becomes positive. This is what I mean by positive effort against the current. It is not really against the current; it is for the consciousness. The current is being used just as an opportunity – just to weigh yourself, just to find yourself out. Just to feel the upward, the downward is needed. The more forceful the current, the more forceful will be the feeling of the upward. So use nature as an opportunity, not as an enemy. Use instincts as friends, not as enemies. They are friends. Only through your ignorance can you make them enemies. They are friends.
When someone reaches the original source – the peak of the river from where the river comes down – when one reaches the original source one is just thankful – thankful towards the river, grateful towards the river, because it is only through the river that he could achieve the source. So when someone reaches the peak of consciousness, he is thankful to every instinct because they all helped, they all created the situation, they all created the opportunity. And they were flowing in the opposite direction. So their opposite flow is not really against you; the river is not against you. You can be against the river, and if you are against the river then you will never win. The greater possibility is that you may become perverted.
So use nature to transcend it. When you see there is anger, don’t fight anger directly: weigh yourself, feel the energy, transcend the anger. Anger is there: remain silent, feel anger and feel yourself and weigh yourself – begin to flow upward. Take it as a play. Don’t be serious. Seriousness is a disease. lf you take everything negatively then you will be serious. Then everything disturbs you: “Why is there anger? Why is there greed? Why this? Why that?” Everything disturbs you, and you become serious.
But our so-called saints are very serious. Really, I cannot conceive how a saint can be serious, he can only be playful. The seriousness shows he has been fighting. A soldier, of course, is bound to be serious. A saint need not be, must not be. Really, it disqualifies him from being a saint. A saint must be playful because nothing is against him – everything is for him and he can use everything for himself.
When I say: “effort against the current,” I mean play against the current – play. Try – see what you can do. The current is flowing downward. Can you flow upward? The anger is there, someone has insulted you, the button has been pushed. Can you remain non-angry? Just play, play with the situation; don’t be serious. The moment you become serious, you have become angry, really. Anger is very serious. Be playful, laugh, and see that the anger has been switched on, that the conditioned mind has been switched on. The anger is boiling there – now, swim against the current. Take it as a play, and see whether it is possible that someone has insulted you – the anger has been created in the metabolism – now, can you still swim beyond it? Don’t fight it.
That’s why I say the difference is very subtle. Standing on the bank you cannot feel the difference. Unless you have been in the river and experienced both…. You are standing on the bank, and someone is fighting the river and someone is just playing with the river, going upward. What difference can you see from the bank? Only one: one will be serious and the other will be playful, nothing else.
One who is in fear, afraid, fighting, will be serious, deadly serious. How can he laugh? How can he play? If the current pushes him he will feel defeated. The other one who is playing will not be serious at all. He can laugh: he can laugh with the river, he can laugh with the waves, and if the current pushes him down he will not feel defeated, he will try again. He will not be serious. Rather, he will begin to love the river because it pushes. He will begin to love the river. The difference will be inner, qualitative.
Suppression is a serious disease. Transforming oneself is a play – it is not serious at all. It is sincere, but never serious. It is authentic, but never serious. The quality of playfulness always remains there; it is the very spirit. With positivity you are creating something inside. The outward is just an opportunity; the inside creation is the thing. The emphasis is on something else. It is not on fighting the river, the emphasis is on the upward flow.
For example, I am writing something on a blackboard. I use a blackboard, but I write with white chalk because on a blackboard the white chalk becomes clear in contrast. I can write on a white wall also; the writing will be there, but it will be as if it is not because the contrast will not be there. So the blackboard is not against the white chalk. It is not the enemy, it is the friend. Only against it do the white lines become more white. On a white wall they will just lose themselves, they will be nowhere.
So who is the enemy – the white wall or the blackboard? Who is the enemy? The white wall is the enemy because you lose. The blackboard is not the enemy; really, it is the friend. On it, the white becomes more white and clear and apparent. But when I am writing on a blackboard my emphasis, my intention is not to destroy the blackboard. Rather, my intention is to make the white lines clear. If you are trying to destroy the blackboard, then the blackboard is the enemy. See the difference: if you are trying to destroy the blackboard by whitewashing it, then you will feel the blackboard as the enemy.
You can whitewash it; then there will be a fight. But when you are writing something on it, your emphasis is not on the blackboard. Really, you never remember it, you need not remember it. It is not even in your awareness, it is only on the fringe. You write: the emphasis is on writing, not on destroying the blackboard. You remember what you are writing, and the blackboard helps. It never obstructs you.
So your emphasis must be on what you are trying to achieve, not on what you are against. If you are trying to achieve love, then be positively concerned with love, not with destroying hate. You can never destroy it. You will not be able to destroy hate, but the moment love is there, the whole energy is transformed. It begins to flow “lovewards.”
Don’t be negative about your energies, instincts, about anything. Be positive, and when you are positively creating something, be playful. It is your nature, why fight it? You have created it. It is your effort. You wanted to create it, so you have created it. You have chosen it; it is your freedom. If you are angry it is your choice – so why be against it? It is your choice. For lives and lives you have used anger, so it is there. Why be angry against it? No one has chosen it except you. So whatsoever you are, you are your own creation.
So it is nonsense to think in terms of negativity. Rather, feel that if you can create such a madman inside of you, then really you are capable of many things – if you can create such a hell, why not a heaven? But don’t be concerned with the hell. Be concerned with heaven and begin to create it. When the heaven is created you will not find the hell. It will have disappeared completely because it exists only as a negative, it exists only as an absence.
Because there is no heaven, hell has to be. Because there is no love, hate has to be. Because there is no light, darkness is there. Don’t fight with darkness; create the light, be concerned with the creation of light. When the light is there, then where will the darkness be? But you can fight directly – don’t think about the light at all and begin to fight darkness directly. Whatsoever you do, the darkness will never be destroyed. On the contrary, you may be destroyed in the fight. How can you fight darkness directly? It is an absence. Darkness only means that the light is not. So, please, create light.
The river is flowing downward, and you are flowing with it because you don’t know the upward flow. You have not known it; that is the only thing. Once you know it, let all the rivers flow downward, but you cannot flow downward. Then go with the river to the very sea, and you will not go downward.
It is difficult to sense the difference. That’s why so much suppression is in the world. No one has taught it – everyone has understood it. No one has taught it – neither a Buddha nor a Mahavira nor a Jesus nor a Krishna has taught it. This is a miracle. No one has taught suppression because no one can. It is absolute nonsense! But everyone has suppressed, and everyone is suppressing – because the difference is so subtle that whenever transformation starts, suppression is understood.
Whenever a teacher is born who begins to talk about transformation, followers gather who begin to understand about suppression – because it is so delicate, so delicate, that unless you experience it there is every possibility you will misunderstand it. So try to experience it. The primary requirement: don’t be against anything – be for. Be for something. Don’t be against something.
Really, when you are against something your future is not open. Only when you are for something does your future open. When you are against something you are clinging to the past. You can never be against the future. How can you be against the future? You can only be against the past. So let it be under-stood in this dimension also: when you are against, you are against the past. You are fighting with death. The past is no more, so why fight it? Create the future; be for something. Then you become positive.
There are two types of freedom: one is from something and one is for something. A young man is fighting with his parents to be free; he becomes a hippie. Then for some time the fight continues. The parents cannot do anything, and they forget. Then for the first time the boy begins to feel, “What to do?” because he was only against. The freedom was from the parents. It was not leading anywhere; it was not for something. It was just against something.
This not only happens to individuals; it happens to races, to nations. It has happened always. You fight for freedom against the British or against someone else…ultimately you achieve the freedom, and then you begin to feel vacant, empty. What to do? You were never fighting for something, so your force dies with your enemy.

One young man came to me, very educated. He was madly in love with a girl, but his parents were not for it, they didn’t belong to the same religion. He was saying, “Whatsoever the future may be, even if I may be just begging on the street, I am going to marry this girl. But my father is determined to disown me if I marry this girl.”
His father is a rich man, so I asked the boy, “Are you really in love with the girl or just angry with your father? Decide this – because these are two different things. Are you really in love with this girl or is this love just a by-product and you are really against your father and using this love as a fighting point, as a front?”
He hesitated. He said, “Let me think about it. I have not thought it over. But why do you ask such a question? Really, I am in love.”
I said, “You just go and think it over.”
He came and said, “No, I am in love.”
I just looked into his eyes and he became uneasy. I remained silent and continuously looked in his eyes, stared.
He became uneasy and said, “What are you doing? Do you think I am not in love?”
I was still silent.
He said, “What do you mean? Why are you so silent? Do you think that I am falsifying, or that I am rationalizing?”
I remained silent.
He said, “It seems you have read my mind. The more I think about it, the more I feel that I am against my father. But still I am going to marry.”
So I said, “Okay, marry!”
After five years he committed suicide. He wrote a letter to me: “You were right. The moment I married the whole love died, because with marriage the fight with my father ended. I was disowned and there was no relationship. Everything ended, and in that very moment the romance was not there. It was really a fight against something, it was not for something.” And he said, “Now I am committing suicide because life is so boring.”

Life will be a boredom if you are always against and never for. Never be against, always be for. So when I say “against the current,” I mean for something, for the peak. Sex is not bad, but the peak is better. So never think in terms of bad and good. Always think in terms of good and better – mm? The bad must be thrown out, it must not be given any status in the mind. Always think in terms of good and better and better. Life is that.
Once you create good and bad, soon the good will drop, and bad and worse and worse will follow. So nothing is bad, but better things are possible. Always remember, and struggle for better things. Then you have a positive flow.

Osho,
How can one know when one has become completely free
of animal instincts, especially from sensual instincts?
One thing: when you really become free, when you really become free, you cannot even feel freedom. It is always felt against slavery. So when you really become free you neither feel freedom nor slavery. Then you are free. If you feel freedom, it means some slavery is still there. Freedom is felt only against slavery. When you enter the real freedom you enter an existence which is lived moment to moment, neither as unfree nor as free.
But the very formulation of the question carries our mind with it – the very formulation: “When shall we be free?” – we are against something. “When shall we be free?” – and especially from sensual things. But why? The old mind, the old preachings, the morality, the religions, they all teach that as long as there is sensuality you will never be free. They say that as long as sensuality is there you can never be free. Sensuality must go; then you will be free. That’s why we ask.
Really, as far as I am concerned, sensuality will not be there but you will be more sensuous when you are really free. You will be more sensitive, and your every sense will become so cleansed that you cannot even conceive what these senses can give. But there will be no sensuality. Sensuality is something else: it is not sensuousness. Sensuality means a hankering; it means a constant obsession.
For example, one who is constantly thinking about food cannot meditate, he cannot pray, he cannot study. Whatsoever he is doing, the food is an obsession inside, he will go on enjoying food in his imagination. Even if he begins to think about heaven he will think about food: “What type of food will be available in heaven?”
So such persons have said that in heaven there is a kalpa-vriksha – a tree under which you sit and think anything and it is supplied instantaneously, immediately. You think of food and the food is there. You think of a woman and the woman is there. You think of wine and the wine is there. It is a wish fulfilling tree. Those who imagined this tree must have been very, very deep in sensuality. In the Koran it is said that in heaven there are rivers of wine. So whosoever has thought this must have been deeply sensual – a hankering, such a hankering, that even in heaven….
When Islam was developing in Arabian countries homosexuality was just an accepted norm, so only in the Mohammedan heaven is homosexuality allowed – in no other heaven. It is said that not only beautiful girls, but beautiful boys will be available. This is sensuality. You cannot even conceive of heaven without your lusts.
I don’t say that there will not be…I am not saying that. Maybe – but why do you think about it? I am not at all concerned with what is there or not, but why can your mind not conceive of anything except that which you are after? You have to make provisions and you have to make pre-arrangements, plannings…this is sensuality.
And this is the paradox: the more sensual you are, the less you will be sensuous, sensitive, because sensitivity is always in the present and sensuality is always in the future. So if a person is constantly thinking of food, when the food is given to him he will not be able to feel the bliss. Really, on the contrary, he will be taking food and thinking of other food. A person who is constantly thinking of sex will not be able to go deep into sex. When he is going into sex he will be thinking of other women or other men, and then there is a vicious circle.
The less he enjoys, the more he goes after thinking, and everything becomes cerebral, mental. He eats with mind, not with the body. His sex becomes cerebral, his everything be-comes cerebral. In everything his mind takes over, and mind cannot do anything except thinking. So mind goes on thinking and thinking. Really, such a guard is created around the mind that he becomes less and less sensitive. The senses lose life, and the mind exploits everything from the senses, usurps everything. The mind cannot do anything, it can only think – and thinking cannot give you contentment.
So the more you feel discontent, the more you think. Then you are in a vicious circle, and ultimately you become absolutely incapable of feeling anything through the senses. This is sensuality: senses prostituted by the mind, or mind having taken all the senses into itself. This is sensuality.
A really free consciousness will not be sensual, but will be sensitive – deeply sensitive and sensuous. Really, when a Buddha sees a flower he sees the flower in its totality, in its total beauty, in its total aliveness. The color, the fragrance – everything Buddha sees in its totality. He will never think again about this flower – he will never be sensual. He will not hanker again to see it more and more, repeatedly. He will never think again about this flower – not because he is not sensuous, but because he is totally sensuous and he has lived this experience so deeply that there is no need to repeat.
The need to repeat comes because you cannot live any moment totally – so you eat, and again you have to think to repeat it; you love, and you have to think to repeat it. You are less concerned with living than you are concerned with repetition. This repetitive hankering is sensuality.
A Buddha is not sensual in this sense – he is deeply sensuous. His every sense-door is clear, transparent. He feels everything, he lives every moment totally, he loves every moment totally and he experiences it so totally that there is no need to repeat, so he never thinks about it. He goes on and on, and every moment is so rich that there is no need to repeat any old moment. There is no need. The need is created because you are incapable of living in the moments which are present. You are incapable, so you go on.
If I pass through this city and think, “No, London is better, I must be there,” it means only that I am not capable of experiencing this city. That is why the memory comes. Otherwise, if I can live in this city, there is no need. And remember that this type of mind, when it goes to London, will not be able to live there either because this type of mind cannot live in the moment that is there. This mind will think about Tokyo, about Calcutta, about other places – and we go on missing. Live!
So a totally free mind will not even be aware of freedom – first thing. It will be so free that it cannot be aware of freedom and it will not be aware of any bondage. It will be aware only of a life which is moving, moving moment to moment. This movement is unmotivated – mm? – that is what is meant by freedom. This movement is unmotivated. If you move with a motivation, then you are bound.
If I am saying something with some motivation then I am not free, the motivation is my bondage. If I am just saying it with no motivation…not even this much – that you may understand or may not understand it. Not even this much – I must make you understand it – then it has a freedom, unmotivated. Then it is a bliss in itself to have talked, to have said, to have expressed. It is enough. If there is no motivation beyond it, then it is a free movement. So in freedom you will not live through motivation you will live directly, immediately. That immediate living is freedom. But there is no awareness of it because you cannot feel it. You can feel it only against some bondage.
Sensuality will not be there, but senses will be there – and more acute, more alive. This is as it should be. A Jesus can love more. Really, only a Jesus can love – unmotivated. His very being is love. Senses are there, really, for the first time; without the disturbance of the mind, they function totally. Eyes see as they should see. They see without any thought, they see without any prejudice. They see that which is; nothing is projected. Ears hear that which is said with no distortion, because the mind is not there. Hands touch that which is with no desire, with no lust, with no motivation, with no longing. Hands just touch – then touch becomes pure, total. With no disturbance they simply touch, then touch goes deep. Then the soul is touched even by a hand; the hand becomes a passage.
Senses are there – more purified, more acute, more authentic – but sensuality is not there because such a man lives so deeply that he never wants to repeat. And even if something is repeated, he never feels it is repeated because everything is so new.
The less you live, the more you have to substitute for it by your dreaming mind. The less you live, the more the mind has to substitute for it. The more you live, the less is the need of the mind to substitute.
When you live totally, mind is not needed. When you are in love, why should the mind be needed? When you are eating, why should the mind be needed? When you are walking, why should the mind be needed?
You can move without the mind. You can eat without mind coming in, with no thought process. You can touch someone, you can kiss someone, you can embrace someone without the thought process coming in. Then you live totally, and you will never long for any moment that is lived totally to be repeated, because you long only for something which has remained in-complete. The mind goes on back again and again to complete it. The mind is a very great perfectionist – everything must be perfect. So if something is left incomplete the mind goes back again and again.
It is just like when one of your teeth falls out and then you continuously touch the spot with your tongue to feel the absence, the whole day long. You will be bored – but again, unaware, you will touch the absence. You know now that the tooth is not there, but why does this tongue now go constantly to the spot and it has never done so before? When the tooth was there this tongue never touched it. Why, when the tooth was there, was the tongue not concerned at all with touching it? When the tooth is not there the tongue goes on, goes on, goes on – it becomes mad. Why? Because now the tongue feels something incomplete, some gap, and the gap calls again and again.
So with any experience lived totally you will never go again to feel it in the mind. If you have really loved someone there will be no memory – memory in the sense that the mind is going constantly to it again and again. If you have not loved, then the absence is felt. You feel guilty and you feel that something has been missed, so it must be substituted – then the mind goes on thinking.
The freer you are, the less is the need to substitute with mental activity. Sensuality is substituting – you understand me? Sensuality is substituting something that you are missing. So when consciousness is really transformed and becomes free, there is no feeling of freedom. When consciousness is transformed and becomes holy, there is no feeling of holiness. So a real saint is one who doesn’t know that he is a saint. Only sinners know that they are saints. Only sinners know!
A really good man never knows that he is good; only bad ones know they are good. How can you feel your health? Only an ill person, a diseased person, begins to think about health. When you are healthy, you are just healthy. Really, you never remember that you are healthy. You begin to feel about the body only when you are ill. So if someone goes on talking about health, be confident that he is ill.
It happens that ill persons will go on creating many theories about health. Ill persons will constantly talk about health and will become experts. It happens daily, that if you are ill and cannot get beyond your illness, sooner or later you are going to be a naturopath. If medicines are not going to help, what to do? Constant thinking and reading about health will make you a naturopath. So naturopathy is good in one way because every patient becomes a doctor. If you are really healthy, then there is no need. And the same applies everywhere. When you are free, you don’t feel it; when you are good, you don’t feel it; when you are moral, you don’t feel it.
Secondly, when you are free you will live moment to moment, totally. This can be said in a general way. We can never be particular because it will depend…. For example, Mohammed married, and he married nine women. We cannot conceive the same about Mahavira, we cannot conceive the same about Buddha. Buddha was married and he left his home, but Mohammed married nine women. So if you ask a Jaina, he cannot say that Mohammed is a realized soul – how can he be? And the same is the case with Mohammedans. They cannot conceive how these “escapists,” Mahavira and Buddha, were realized souls – because whenever someone is realized he is not afraid. He can marry nine women, and this Buddha leaves even one, escapes. Why?
Jainas cannot conceive that Krishna was an enlightened one because he was just so ordinary, doing such ordinary things. Love is one of the most ordinary things, and he was loving and singing and dancing and fighting and doing everything, so how can he be enlightened? Jainas think that Krishna died and went to the last hell – the seventh hell. According to them, he is now in the seventh hell. He was the greatest sinner possible because he seduced Arjuna into fighting, for the war. They say Arjuna was just on the verge of being a mahatma. He was just trying to escape when this fellow Krishna seduced him and forced him to fight. So in Jainas’ eyes this man Krishna is the most violent person – and he is suffering in hell.
This happens, this is natural. This is natural because we become obsessed with types. Then we cannot allow another type to have freedom, enlightenment. This depends! The type, the individuality, goes to the very end, to the very peak. It becomes purified, but it goes on. So a Buddha may feel that now he need not be attached with any woman. It depends on him. It depends – and he is free to move in his way. A Mohammed may think quite differently, and he is free to move in his own way. Everyone moves, when free, in his own way. You cannot force a type.
For example, Mohammed was not at ease with music at all. He could not be; that was his type. But the Mohammedans think that anyone who loves music is just a sinner, so in a Mohammedan mosque you cannot play music. But Mohammed loved perfume very much, so Mohammedans continue to love perfumes. A very poor Mohammedan, particularly on religious days, will sometimes also use perfume. Perfume is as sensuous as music – even more. So what is the difference? Perfume is music for the nose and nothing else, and music is perfume for the ears and nothing else. But it depends on the type.
When Mohammed became free, totally free, enlightened, his “type” began to move freely in his own way, and a sudden burst and a sudden feeling for perfumes came – unmotivated. But when followers come, they create motivations. They begin to think that there must be some reason. Nothing is there as a reason. It is simply the freedom of a type.
Meera goes on singing and Chaitanya goes on dancing from village to village. Mohammed cannot conceive: “What nonsense are you doing? Dancing – how is it related with divine realization?” A Chaitanya cannot conceive how you can remain without dancing when that friend comes. How can you remain without dancing? A Chaitanya cannot conceive how a Buddha likes sitting when the divine has come to the door: “How can you go on sitting like that when the light has descended? You must go dancing! You must become mad!” But these are types, and one must be aware to allow every type to be there. Then the world is richer.
So I cannot say what will happen to you when you are free – what senses will become more purified, what senses will begin to be expressive of your soul. No one can say; it is unpredictable. One thing is certain, sensuality will not be there. Senses will be there – more perfect, more pure – and purer will be their experience and deeper. The sensitivity will be there, but no sensuality.

Osho,
Seeing the dialectical facts of life, can one practice both the path of relaxation and the path of effort simultaneously?
No, it is not possible. You cannot practice both simultaneously because both are diametrically opposite. They lead to one point, but they don’t pass through the same road, through the same route, through the same realms. They are quite diametrically opposite.
You cannot practice both, just like you cannot go to one place simultaneously following two roads. Two roads may be going…you are going to the station and two roads may be going to the station, but you cannot follow both the roads simultaneously. If you do follow them, you will not reach the station. Both roads go, but then you will not reach, because then you will have to go ten steps on one, then come back, follow the other, then come back, follow the first one…. Then you can follow much, but you will reach nowhere.
Every way is a particular way. It has its own route, its own steps, its own milestones, its own symbols, its own philosophy, its own methodology, its own vehicles, its own mediums of movement. It has its own everything. Every way is a perfect way. So never be in two minds, it will simply create confusion. Follow one! When you reach to the end, you will know that even if you had followed the other you would have arrived. When you have arrived, you can try just as a play to go on the other, that’s another thing, just to know whether this road also reaches or not. But don’t follow two simultaneously, because every path is so scientifically perfect that this will only create disturbance.
Really, in the old days, even to know about the other path was prohibited because even that knowing creates disturbance. Our minds are so childish and so curious, and foolishly curious, that if we hear about something else or read about something else we begin to amalgamate. We don’t know that anything which is meaningful on a particular path may be just harmful on another. So you cannot amalgamate. Some part in one car may be meaningful, useful – so useful that the car cannot move without it. But the same part can become a hindrance in another car. Don’t use it, because every part is meaningful only in its own pattern, in its own gestalt. The moment you change the whole, the part becomes a hindrance.
So much confusion has come into the religious world be-cause now every religion is known to everybody, every path is known, and you are just confused. Now, to find a Christian is difficult, to find a Hindu is difficult, to find a Mohammedan is difficult, because everyone is just something of a Hindu, something of a Mohammedan, something of a Christian, and that creates very much danger. It is dangerous. It may prove suicidal.
So purity of path is a basic necessity for one who has to follow. If one has just to think about it then there is no need for any purity, you can go on thinking. But if you are to travel, then purity of the path is very essential and you must be aware not to confuse anything and not to bring any alien, foreign element in it.
It doesn’t mean that the other is wrong. It only means that the other is right only on the other’s path. You need not take the other conclusion that “Only I am right and the other is wrong.” The other is right in its own way. If you have to follow another path, just go to the other’s way leaving your way completely.
That is why the old religions – and there are only two basic religions, Hindu and Jewish – were never ready to convert anyone. And the only reason was this, that they knew a very old, very deep tradition – that to convert is to confuse. If someone has been brought up as a Christian and you convert him into a Hindu, you will just confuse him because now he cannot forget that which he has known. Now you cannot just wash it out. It will remain there, and on that foundation whatsoever you give him as Hinduism will not mean the same because his old foundation will always be there. You will just confuse him, and that confusion will not make him religious, cannot make him.
So the old religions – really, there are just two old religions, the Jewish and the Hindu, and all other religions are just branches of those – have remained very dogmatically nonconverting. The Hindu concept was disturbed by Dayananda. Because his mind was working in a political way, not in a religious one, he began to convert. But that concept has a beauty of its own. It doesn’t mean that other religions are bad; it doesn’t mean that others are not right. It doesn’t mean anything like that. It only means that if you have been brought up in a particular concept, it is better to follow that. It has gone deep in your bones and blood, so it is better to follow that.
But now it has become impossible, and it will never again be possible because now the old patterns have broken. Now no one can be a Christian, no one can be a Hindu. That is not possible now, so a new categorization is needed. Now I don’t categorize as Hindu and Mohammedan and Christian. That categorization is not possible now. It is just dead and must be thrown away. Now we must categorize every path.
For example, there are two basic divisions – the path of relaxation and the path of effort; the path of surrender and the path of will. This is a basic division, then other divisions will follow, but these two are basic and quite diametrically opposite. The path of relaxation means surrender just here and now with no effort. If you can, you can. If you cannot, you cannot – there is no go. The path of surrender is very simple: Surrender! If you ask how, then you are not for this path, because the “how” belongs to the other path – mm? “How” means by what effort, by what technique: “How am I to surrender?” If you ask, “How I am to surrender?” then you are not for the path of surrender. Then go to the other.
If you can just surrender without asking how, only then is it possible. So it seems simple, but it is very difficult, very arduous, because the “how” comes instantaneously. If I say “Surrender,” you have not even heard the word and the “how” comes up – “How?” – then you are not for this path. Then the other path is of will, effort, endeavor. Then every “how” is supplied – how to do it. Then there are many ways.
So surrender has only one way, and there are no branches, there cannot be. There cannot be different types of surrender. Surrender is simply surrender. There are no types. Types belong to techniques. There can be different techniques; but because there is no technique, surrender remains the purest path, without any division.
Then the second: the path of will. It has many divisions. All the yogas, methods, belong to the second. The second says, “You cannot relax just now, so we will prepare you, a preparation is needed. So follow these methods and a moment will come when you will drop.”
They look difficult – they are not. They look difficult because they say preparation, methods, years of training and discipline are necessary. So they look difficult, but they are not – because the more time is given to you the more simplified the process becomes. Surrender is the most difficult process because no time is allowed. They say, “Just here and now.” If you can, you can. If you cannot, you cannot.
Basho, a Zen monk, would say to whosoever would come, “Surrender.” If the person asked, “How?” he would say, “Go elsewhere.” His whole life he used only two statements continuously – never a third. He would say, “Surrender.” If you would say, “How?” he would say, “Go somewhere else.”
Sometimes some persons came who would not ask, “How?” and would surrender. But this phenomenon is becoming rare. As our modern mind progresses surrender will be rare, surrender will be difficult, because surrender means an innocence, a trusting mind, an absolute faith. It doesn’t need effort, it needs faith. It doesn’t ask for the method and the way and the bridge, it takes the jump. It doesn’t ask for the steps – it doesn’t ask anything.
But the other path is of effort, tension. Many methods are possible, because to do something there are many techniques. There are many techniques for how to create the ultimate tension so that you explode. But never follow both. You cannot – you can just go on thinking about both. And don’t confuse. Determine clearly, exactly, which is for you.
Can you trust? Are you ready without any “how” to take the jump? If not then forget relaxation, then forget surrender, then even forget the very word – because you cannot understand it. Then effort…and this Upanishad is talking about effort: upward effort, a continuous arrowing of the mind towards the peak.

============================================================

Sadaamanskam arghyam

Mind constantly arrowed towards That
is arghya – the offering.
What can man offer? What can the offering be? We can offer only that which belongs to us. That which does not belong cannot become an offering, and man has always offered that which does not belong to him at all. Man has sacrificed that which is not his at all.
Religion becomes a ritual if you offer something which is not yours. Religion becomes an authentic experience if you offer something which really belongs to you. Rituals are really methods to escape from authentic religiousness. You can find substitutes, but you are deceiving no one except yourself – because how can you offer something which is not yours? You can sacrifice a cow, you can sacrifice a horse, you can offer properties of land, but nothing belongs to you. So, really, this is theft in the name of religion. How can you offer to the divine that which is not yours?
So the first thing is to find out what is yours, what belongs to you. Is there anything which belongs to you? Are you the master of anything of which you can say, “This belongs to man and I offer it to the divine”? This is one of the most difficult questions: “What belongs to man?” Nothing seems to belong, and when nothing seems to belong to you, then you can only say, “I can offer myself.” But even that is not right, because do you yourself belong to you? Is your being yours? Are you responsible for your being? Are you responsible to be?
Man comes from somewhere, some unknown source. He is not responsible for his being here. Kierkegaard has said, “When I look at man, I feel that he has been thrown here.” He is not even responsible for his own being; the being is grounded in the divine. Look at it this way, can a tree say, “I offer myself to the earth”? What does it mean? It is meaningless because the tree is rooted in the earth, the tree is just a part of the earth. The tree is just earth and nothing else, so how can a tree say, “I offer myself to the earth”? It is meaningless. The tree is already a part. It is not different, so offering is not possible. So, first: you can offer something which belongs to you. Second: you can offer if there is a distance, a separateness.
The tree cannot offer itself because it is not different from the earth. Or, think of it this way: a river cannot say, “I offer myself to the sea.” The river is not rooted in the sea, it is separate. But, still, the river cannot say, “I offer myself to the sea.” Why? It cannot say this because it is not the river’s choice. The river has to flow to the sea, there is no choice left. The river is just helpless. Even if the river wants to choose not to offer she cannot choose it, so offering is inevitable. When the offering has no choice it is meaningless.
The river cannot say, “I offer myself to the sea” because she has to come. This coming is just part of nature. The river is not coming to the sea by choice because there is no choice on the river’s part. The river is just helpless, she cannot do otherwise. So a third thing: you can offer something only when you can do otherwise. If you are capable of not offering, only then do you become capable of offering. Then this is your choice.
Man is rooted just like a tree. Man is a tree, only with moving roots – rooted in being, rooted in existence. Man is not separate; deep down there is no separation. Man is not responsible for his own being; he has to return helplessly, just like a river falling into the sea. So where is the choice? How can you offer? Your death will be a merging whether you choose it or not. Who are you? Where do you stand and where can the offering become possible?

This sutra is very deep. This sutra says:
Mind constantly arrowed towards That
is arghya – the offering.
You cannot offer yourself, but you can offer your mind – that belongs to you and that is your choice. If you do not offer it, the divine cannot force it to be offered. You are not helpless, it is not like a river falling into the sea. Mind has a choice. You can go on denying the divine and the divine cannot force you. Your being is rooted in the divine, but not your mind. You cannot deny the divine as far as existence is concerned. You are part of it.
You can deny the divine as far as consciousness is concerned. You can deny so much that you can live in a consciousness in which there is nothing like the divine. So to say, “God is” or “God is not,” can be your choice. Even if there is no God you can create one, you can believe. Even if there is God you can deny, and nothing can be forced upon you. So the only choice is with the mind, the only freedom is with the mind. Your being is rooted, but your mind is free.
Of course, your mind comes out of your being, but still it is free, free in the sense that a tree is rooted in the earth – the tree is rooted, the branch and the root, every flower is rooted – but the fragrance of the flower can be free and can move, unrooted. So you are just a tree, but your mind is fragrance. It may be offered, it may not be offered, it depends on you.
Man’s freedom is man’s mind. Animals are not free only because they do not have a choice; they are just what they are meant to be. They have no choice. They cannot go against nature. Man’s mind is man’s freedom. So one thing, the basic one to be understood, is that because the mind is a freedom it can become an offering. You can offer your mind, but you can resist also, you can go against also, and even God cannot force you – that is the glory, that is the beauty of human existence. So man is the only animal who is in a certain way free. This freedom you can use or you can abuse.
Mind constantly arrowed towards That
is arghya – the offering.
If your mind can be arrowed constantly, continuously towards That, you have offered yourself. But because mind has a freedom it is very difficult to tether it somewhere. The very nature of it is freedom, so the moment you try to tether it, it rebels, it becomes rebellious.
It may follow you if you are not trying, but if you try, then it is bound to rebel because the very nature of mind is freedom. The moment you try to fix it somewhere, it rebels. This is natural. You can offer the mind, but it is not easy. It is the most difficult thing to offer the mind, and when I say, “Mind means freedom,” it becomes more difficult. You are trying to put your mind against its nature.
Concentration is against mind because you are trying to narrow it down somewhere – exclusively somewhere. But the mind is freedom, movement, a constant movement. It lives only when it moves. It is only when it is in movement. It is a dynamic force, so the moment you try to fix it you are trying something impossible. So what to do? The religious man has always tried to fix the mind towards the divine, and the more he tries to fix it, the more the mind goes to the Devil.
Jesus comes to meet the Devil. The Devil is nowhere except in the effort of Jesus to be constantly arrowed towards the divine. The Devil doesn’t exist. It is just that when you force your mind to be tethered somewhere, it creates the opposite in order to move. So you must understand the law of reverse effect. With the mind, that law is foundational. Whatsoever you try to do, the reverse will be the result. The reverse, the very reverse, will be the result. So try to arrow your mind towards God and you will come to face the Devil. The effect will be the reverse. Try to steer your mind and your mind will become anarchic, you will be encountering turmoil.
The more stillness is sought, the more unstill the mind becomes. The more you try to make it silent, the more noise it creates. The more you try to make it good, the more sins become tempting. This is the foundational law for the mind. It is as foundational with the mind as Newton’s Law is with physics: the law of reverse effect.
So whatsoever you are trying to force you will never achieve. You will achieve the reverse, and then a vicious circle is created. When you achieve the reverse, you begin to think that the reverse is so powerful that “I am to fight more.” The more you fight, the more powerful will be the reverse, the opposite. The opposite is not. You create it only because you try to tether your mind. It is a by-product – a by-product which comes only because you do not know the law. So what to do to offer the mind to the divine? If you choose the divine against something, you will never be able to offer.
There is only one way: choose the divine as the all; choose the divine as the whole; choose the divine everywhere in everything. Even if the Devil comes to face you, realize the divine in it. Then you have offered – and then the offering can be continuous with no break, with no gap, because now no gap is possible. That’s why the Upanishads don’t use the word God. They use That, because the moment you say God, the Devil is created. They don’t use any word really, they use just a finger. They say That, and this That is comprehending all – everything everywhere. So if you can conceive of the divine as the all, then you can offer. Otherwise the contrary will be created – you will offer to God and the offering will go to the Devil.
All the religions have faced the problem, the dichotomy – Christianity, Judaism or Mohammedanism. All the religions born out of India have accepted the dichotomy. They have accepted the God-and-the-Devil dichotomy. So if you see the history of these religions you will become aware of a very strange phenomenon. Jesus stands for God, but the Devil goes on tempting him also. Whatsoever Jesus stands for, his Church stands quite against it – diametrically against. So Christianity is least concerned with Christ. Rather, Christianity is his enemy, because whatsoever the Church has done, it cannot be said that it is God’s work. It can be said that it is the Devil’s work. But this had to be due to the law of reverse effect.
Once you accept the dichotomy, the opposite will be the result. Christ preaches love and the Church stands for hate. Christ says, “Don’t resist even evil,” but the whole history of the Church is a long war. So Nietzsche is right when he says, “The first and the last Christian died on the cross” – the last also! After Jesus there has been no Christian. But, really, St Paul and others are not so much responsible as they appear to be. The real responsibility goes to the ignorance concerning the law of reverse effect.
If you choose a part as divine and a part as non-divine or anti-divine, then the mind will move. The mind has its own tricks for moving. It can justify evil in the name of good, it can rationalize war for peace, it can kill and murder because of love. So the mind is very cunning and clever in moving to the opposite, and when it moves it gives you every reason to believe that “I am not moving.” So if you choose God as something apart from the world or anti the world, you will never be able to offer the mind. And a partial offering is no offering, this must also be remembered.
A partial offering is mathematically wrong. It is just like a partial circle – which is not a circle. A circle is a circle only when it is full, complete. You cannot call a partial circle a circle. It is not. Either offering is total or it is not. How can you offer partially? That is intrinsically impossible. How can you love partially? Either you love or not, no compromise is possible. No degrees of love are possible. Either it is there or it is not there. All else is just deception.
Offering is a total phenomenon. You give up, you surrender, but you cannot say, “I partly surrender.” What do you mean? A partial surrender means that you are still the master and can even take it back. The part which has remained behind can take it back, can say no tomorrow. So a total surrender is that in which nothing has been left behind; no withholding, so you cannot go back. There is no return possible, because then no one remains behind to go back. So the offering is total.
But if you divide the world, if you divide existence into polar opposites, then you will be in a very deep dichotomy and your mind will move to the opposite. The more you resist, the more attractive it becomes. Negatives are very attractive. When you insist so much on “don’ts,” the attraction becomes unbearable. “No” is a very enchanting invitation. So whenever you try to force your mind towards something, the other – which you are trying not to go towards – will become inviting. Sooner or later you will be bored with the part you have chosen and the mind will move. It always goes on moving.
Chinese philosophy says that the yin goes on moving into the yang and the yang goes on moving into the yin, and they make one circle. They are in a constant movement of one into the other. The man goes on moving into the woman and the woman goes on moving into the man, and they make one circle. The light goes on moving into the darkness and the darkness goes on moving into the light, they make one circle. When you are bored with the light you are attracted by darkness, and when you are bored by darkness you are attracted by light.
You go on moving between the opposites. So if your God is also a part of the opposite world, part of the logic of opposites, you will move to the other extreme. That is why the Upanishad says That. In this That everything is implied, nothing is denied. The Upanishads have a very life-affirmative concept, a very life-affirmative philosophy.
Really, this is very strange. Albert Schweitzer has said that Indian philosophy is life-negating, but he has really misunderstood the whole thing. In his mind, when he says “Hindu philosophy,” he must have been referring to Mahavira and Buddha. But they are not really the main current, they are just rebellious children. Hindu philosophy is not life-negating. On the contrary, Albert Schweitzer is a Christian, deeply Christian, and Christian philosophy is life-negating! Hindu philosophy is one of the most affirmative.
So it is good to go deep in this life-affirmation; only then will you be able to understand the meaning of That, because this is one of the most affirmative words – not denying anything. “Life-denying” means that your God is something against life. Jainas are life-denying. They say that this world is sin; you must leave it, deny it, renounce it! Unless you renounce it totally you cannot achieve the divine. So the divine becomes something you can achieve only conditionally – if you renounce the world. It is a basic condition.
For Buddhists also it is a basic condition: “You must renounce everything; you must choose death. Death must be the goal, not life. You must struggle not to be born again. Life is not of any value, it is of non-value. It exists only be-cause of your sins, it is a punishment, and you must somehow go out of it, not be born again.” But this is not the Hindu concept. The Upanishads are not concerned with this at all.
The same life-denying attitude is of Christianity also: “Life is sin and man is born in sin.” History begins in sin. Adam has been expelled from heaven because he has sinned. He has disobeyed, and now we are born out of the sin. That’s why Christians have been insisting that Jesus was not born out of sex, that he was born out of a virgin girl – because if you are born out of sex you are born out of sin, and at least Jesus must not be born out of sin. So everyone is born in sin; mankind lives in sin. So a deep renunciation is needed to reach the divine.
Christianity is also death-oriented. That’s why the cross became so meaningful. Otherwise, the cross should not be so meaningful, it is a symbol of death. Hindus cannot conceive how the cross can become a symbol – and even Jesus became so significant and important because he was crucified. If you don’t crucify Jesus and he is just ordinary, Christianity would not be born.
Really, those who were death-oriented became attracted towards Christ because he was crucified. The death of Jesus became the most significant historic moment. So really, Christianity was born because Jews foolishly crucified Jesus. If he had not been crucified, there would be no Christianity. So Nietzsche is again right. He says Christianity is not really Christianity but is “crossianity” – cross-oriented.
Schweitzer says that Hindus are life-negating. He is wrong because he is thinking about Buddha; Buddha was as much Hindu as Jesus Christ was Jewish, but just this much. He was born a Hindu as Jesus Christ was born a Jew. But Hindus really have their essence in the Upanishads which precede Buddha, and Buddha has said nothing which is not already in the Upanishads. They are of life-affirmation, total life-affirmation. And what do I mean when I say total life-affirmation…?
You cannot conceive of Jesus dancing, you cannot conceive of Jesus singing, you cannot conceive of Buddha dancing or singing or loving, you cannot conceive of Mahavira fighting, you cannot. Only Krishna can be conceived of as laughing, dancing, loving, even standing in a war, with no denial – with no denial!
The whole life is divine. So to choose God is not to renounce the world. To choose God means to choose God through the world. That is the meaning of That. When you choose God through the world, not against the world, then there is no opposite. Only then can you escape from the law of reverse effect. When you choose That through this, there is no opposition, there is no polarity. And when there is no polarity, mind has no layer in which to move. It is not that it is tethered, it is not that it is in bondage, it is not that you have forced it here. Now there is no possibility for it to move. The opposite is not.
Understand it clearly. When the opposite is not, the mind is free to move, yet it moves not – because where can it move? If it can move, it will move because movement is its nature, and if you create dichotomy then it will move to the opposite, it will rebel against you. If there is no duality, if the opposite is not and if you have comprehended the opposite also in the divine, then where can the mind move? Then wheresoever it moves, it moves only to That. So if Krishna is dancing with a girl, he is dancing with the divine because the girl is not excluded, the divine is not against the girl. If the divine is against the girl, then the girl will become the Devil. Then the girl will tempt, and there is bound to be difficulty.
Christ cannot laugh – he lives in a constant tension. Krishna can laugh because there is no tension at all. When everything is divine, and when through all he has been giving the offering, then where is the tension? Then there is no need. Then Krishna can be at ease anywhere. Even in hell he can be at ease, because even hell is That.
I was telling you that Jainas have put Krishna into hell because he was responsible for the Mahabharat, the great Indian war. They have put him into the seventh hell – the deepest hell for the greatest sinners. But when I close my eyes and begin to think of him in hell, I cannot conceive of him except as dancing. He must be dancing there. Even if he is there he must be dancing, because even hell is That. And he will not be in any hurry and he will not pray to be put out of hell. He will make no effort, because the That is present everywhere. You need not go anywhere and you need not think of conditions, that only in certain conditions is the divine possible. He is possible in every condition. He is unconditionally present.
When you can conceive of the divine as being unconditionally present, then it becomes the That of the Upanishads. Then it is even in poison; then it is even in death; then it is even in suffering. And you cannot move anywhere. Or, wherever you move, you move to That. So That must be conceived of through this, otherwise the law of reverse effect will begin to work. Every religious person has to fall into this law of reverse effect.
Unless you understand totally, unless you begin to feel that this law is working everywhere, never create any polar opposites in the mind otherwise you will be a victim of your own nonsense. The moment you choose something as opposite to something, you have created the ditch where you will fall. You will be hypnotized by the opposite.
We are all hypnotized by the opposite. A society becomes sexual if you say that sex is sin. Then sex becomes romantic, it begins to have a mysterious aura around it. A very simple fact of life, only because it is called sin, becomes the ditch – only because it is called sin! Call anything sin, and you have created a point by which you will be hypnotized. Auto-hypnosis is now possible. Deny something, and you are in the trap.
Lao Tzu says, “An inch’s distinction between earth and heaven, and everything is set apart. An inch’s distinction between good and bad, and everything is set apart.”
No distinction should be made. That’s why religion is not morality. Religion is beyond it because morality cannot exist without distinctions, religion cannot exist with distinctions. Morality cannot exist without creating the other. It depends on polar divisions – good and evil, and so on. So God and the Devil are not part of religion but of morality. The concept of God as opposite to evil, the Devil, Satan, is not really a religious concept. It is a moral concept.
When the Upanishads were translated into western languages for the first time the scholars were at a loss because they were not anything like the Ten Commandments which say, “Do this, don’t do that!” There was nothing like the Ten Commandments, and without the Ten Commandments how can there be a religion? How? – the West couldn’t conceive of it. So these books were “not really religious,” because there was no discussion about what is good and what is bad and what should be done and what should not be done.
They were right in a way. If we conceive of religion as a morality, then the Upanishads are not religious. But if the Upanishads are not religious, then nothing is religious – because morality is just a convenience, and morality can differ from nation to nation, from race to race, from geography to geography, from history to history. It will differ, because every race, every nation, creates its own conveniences. Religion is not a convenience, and it cannot differ from race to race. It is not dependent on geography and it is not dependent on history. Really, it is not dependent on human thinking. It is dependent on the very nature of reality. So religion is, in a way, eternal.
Moralities are always temporal. They belong to some age and to some time and to some space – then they change. When time changes, they change. But religion is eternal because it is the very nature of reality. It is not dependent on your thinking. This religion belongs to nonpolar reality. But reality is divided into polarities: as we see it, it is divided, because the very seeing divides it, just like a ray of light, a ray of sun, is divided through a prism.
When the mind looks at things, they are divided into polarities. The moment we look we have divided. We cannot remain in undivided reality for a single moment. I see you and I have divided: beautiful – ugly, good – bad, white – black, mine – not mine. The moment I see you, division sets in. The mind works as a prism, and the prism divides reality. And if you go on choosing, then you will be a victim of your mind. The good and bad are divided as such by the mind.
Don’t choose the good against the bad, otherwise you will ultimately fall into the bad against the good. Choose good through bad; know bad through good. They are one: feel this undivided oneness. See life through death, see death through life, not as opposites, but as one – as two ends of one thing. This is what is meant by That. And the sutra says, “Mind constantly arrowed towards That is the offering.”
Mind must be flowing towards That constantly, continuously, without any gap. How can the mind flow if you make your God separate from the world? You will have to eat and then you will forget; you will forget your God. You will have to sleep, and then you will forget; you will forget your God. You will have to do many, many things, and God will be coming constantly as a conflict. So a religion which lives with a God against “the world” creates much anguish, and so-called religious persons are not constantly arrowed towards God, but are just constantly arrowed – tense. They live in anguish. Everything becomes against God, so anguish is bound to be there. How can they laugh? How can they sing? Everything comes in between. Wherever they go to find God, something comes as a hindrance.
The whole world becomes inimical. Friends are not friends. They come in between, they become enemies. Love becomes poison, because it comes in between. Everything goes on coming in the way. You are hindered from everywhere. How can you live in peace? – you cannot. Even a very ordinary man, a worldly man, can live in more peace than you. If your God is something opposite to “the world” you cannot live in peace. You will be in a constant torture.
Of course, when the torture is self-imposed, the ego is fulfilled and strengthened so you can enjoy it. When someone begins to enjoy his own imposed tortures he is mad, insane. Now he is not in his senses. So you may become a martyr to your own nonsense, and you can even be worshipped by others, because there are persons who feel very happy when someone tortures himself, they enjoy it. They are sadists; and you begin to be a masochist. You torture yourself. You can torture yourself continuously, and you will torture yourself when the whole world is against God. Then life is bound to be a constant torture. Everything is sin, and everything will create guilt and fear and anxiety, and you will be constantly in a chaos.
You will torture yourself and become a masochist. And whenever there is a masochist, sadists will come around and worship. There are people who feel good when someone is suffering. They would like to make you suffer, but you have even saved them the trouble, you are torturing yourself. They feel very good.
So out of one hundred, ninety-nine so-called saints are just ill, existentially diseased; they are masochists. You can worship them, but they will lead you into a hell. And this is not religion at all. Religion is basically to create an ecstatic life, a life which is a benediction, which is absolute bliss. So how is this anxiety and bliss related? They are poles apart.
The Upanishads say, “Offer your mind to That through this, through everything.” Don’t create any hindrance, don’t create the opposite. Whatsoever is, is That. And, really, a miracle happens. When I say, see good through the evil, evil disappears. When I say, see That through this, this disappears; it becomes transparent and only That remains. “The world” is not there, but we are not yet capable of knowing the That which is there.
“The world” disappears. That’s why Shankara could say it is an illusion. By illusion or by maya it is not meant that the world is not. Only this much is meant: that the world is not a reality, but only a transparency. If you can look deep, the brahman is revealed and “the world” disappears.
If you cannot see That, then the world becomes very real. This reality comes because you cannot find the real. The moment you find the real, “the world” disappears. That doesn’t mean there will not be houses and there will not be nations and there will not be roads; this is not what is meant. When Shankara says that the world is an illusion and it disappears when That is revealed, it is not meant that it will disappear like a dream – no! It will disappear in a very different sense.
It will disappear when the hidden is revealed, when the total is revealed. The gestalt changes, the whole gestalt changes. You begin to look differently, in a new pattern. The same tree for a woodcutter is one thing, and the pattern, the gestalt for a painter is something else. For a woodcutter it may not be green at all because he is concerned with the wood, with the texture of the wood – whether the wood can be used in furniture or not. This mind has a gestalt; in that gestalt, in that pattern, the tree may not be green at all. He may not have seen the greenness of it.
A painter is standing nearby. For him the tree is green, and I wonder whether you know or not that when a painter looks at a tree it is not just green, because there are a thousand types of greens. When you look ordinarily, every tree is green, but no two greens resemble each other. Two greens are two colors. Every green has its own greenness. So for a painter, it is not simply green. It is green A, green B, green C – many shades, many individualities.
A lover who is sad, who has lost his beloved, may not look at the tree at all – the green may look very sad and will have a different color and shades. He cannot feel the texture, or it may even or it may even be that he will remember the body of his beloved, not the texture of the tree. And a child playing there and an old man dying there ? are they looking at one reality? Their gestalts are different. A different tree evolves, a different tree is there.
Is it not possible for a Shankara not to see the tree at all but only the That – not the texture of the tree, not the greenness of the tree, not the sadness of the lover, not the play of the child, not the sorrow of the dying man – nothing? Isn’t it possible for a Shankara not to see the tree at all, but only the That? Then the tree becomes transparent. In a new gestalt the tree disappears and the brahman is revealed. This is what is meant when I say, look, find out, penetrate everywhere for That, and when you begin to feel That everywhere your mind cannot move – the opposite is not.
Then the offering – only then. Then you have been, then you have given. You cannot give yourself, you can give only your mind because you can take away your mind. You are in That, but your mind is not. It can be! – and you are free, the choice is yours. So you will be responsible, no one else. The responsibility is yours; so to be religious or not is your decision. Don’t go into unnecessary things – whether God is or not. It is your decision! It is meaningless to go on discussing whether God is or is not, it is your choice. You can say he is not, but by saying that you are denying a greater reality and the opening towards it. You can say he is, and, by saying that, you are open to a greater reality.
This cannot be proven – whether God is or not. This cannot be proven as a scientific fact, because if it is proven then there will be no freedom. Then offering will be impossible. If it becomes a fact, as secular as any, if it becomes a fact like the moon or the sun or the earth, if it becomes a common, objective fact, then you will not be free to choose. So God can never become a scientific fact, and it cannot be proven he is or not. Only this much can be said: if you choose him you become different; if you don't choose him you will be different again. If you don't choose him you will create a hell for yourself; if you choose him, then you can create an ecstatic existence.
He is irrelevant. It is your choice that counts. Whether God is or is not is meaningless. It is not even worth discussing. The basic, relevant thing is that if you choose you become different, if you don’t choose you are again different. It depends on you. It depends on you whether you want an existence which is just a trembling and a fear, just an anguish and death, just a long suffering – or a bliss, a moment-to-moment opening into greater and greater bliss. So it is not a question of whether God is or not. It is a question whether you want to be transformed and transported into another existence or not. It will always be your choice.
If the whole world says God is, and you deny, you can deny and it cannot be forced on you. That’s why it is an offering. It is an offering! You can offer; you can withhold. You are offered already, so that is not the question, but your mind is not offered, and this is the riddle – that you live in That, but you suffer. You are in That, but you suffer. Why? Because your mind is not in That. Really, your mind suffers – not you. You have never suffered, you cannot suffer. You have never died, you cannot die. But your mind suffers, your mind dies and is born, and it dies and suffers and goes on suffering. This mind is an “overgrowth.” Offer it to That and you will come to the point where you have always been. You will come to realize that which is your nature.
Buddha was asked, “What have you achieved?” When he had achieved nirvana, achieved enlightenment, he was asked, “What have you achieved?”
Buddha said, “I have not achieved anything, only that which was always with me. Rather, on the contrary, I have lost something. I have not achieved anything. I have lost the mind that was with me, and I have achieved That which was always with me, but because of that mind I could not penetrate to it, could not see it.”
It is our choice. The screen on reality is our choice. The covering on reality is the mind. This life of misery is our decision, and no one else is responsible. And you can continue for lives together – you have continued, and you can continue still for lives together. No one can break through and no one can pull you out, because that is your freedom. Only you can jump out of it, and you can jump the moment you decide. So don’t think in the terms “Because I have lived for so many lives in this ignorance, how can I jump in a moment? When I have lived for so many, many lives in ignorance, how can I?” You can jump in a moment, because all these lives were your decision. Change the decision and the whole thing changes.
It is just like this: if there has been darkness in this room for years, will you say: “How can we light a candle this very moment? The darkness has been so long! It has been here for years, so how can a candle burned at this moment dispel it? We will have to struggle for years and years, and the candle will have to struggle for years and years. Only then can the darkness be dispelled because the darkness has a past, a history. It is long, deep-rooted.”
But add the flame and the darkness is not there. Darkness really has no time, it has only duration. But by “duration” I mean that it is not piled one upon another, so it cannot become thick. So one moment’s darkness is as thick as one year’s or one century’s. It cannot be any thicker. It cannot be piled one upon another; it is not being piled up every moment. It cannot become thick and dense so that candlelight cannot penetrate it. It remains the same. It has only duration – a simple duration without any thickness being gathered.
Ignorance is just like darkness – a duration. You can be in it for centuries, for millennia, and in a single moment’s decision it is not there. It is just like light. The moment light is present the darkness is not there. The darkness cannot say, “This is not as it should be. I have been here for many, many centuries and this is not good. I have a hold on this place and I have the possession; I have been in possession.”
Nothing can be said. When the light is there, darkness simply drops. The enlightenment comes just like this, the offering comes. You can offer any moment – you decide. But the offer must be total, and it can be total only if you do not divide reality. Affirm life as divine; affirm both the polar opposites as That. Then, if you move or don’t move, you cannot go anywhere. Or, anywhere you go you will encounter That. This is a continuously arrowed mind, and this, the Upanishads say, is the only offering. All others are just false substitutes.

============================================================

Osho,
In reference to the subject of offering to the divine, please explain what is the significance of will and surrender?
What are the similarities and differences between will and surrender?
The end is always the same, but the beginning differs, and all the differences belong always to the beginning. The nearer you reach, the less is the difference between paths.
In the beginning will and surrender are diametrically opposed. Surrender means absolute will-lessness. You have no will of your own, you feel helpless, you feel you cannot do anything. You are so totally helpless that you cannot even say that will exists, the very concept of will is illusory. You have no will. Rather, on the contrary, you have destiny, not will, so you can only surrender. It is not that you surrender; rather, it is that you cannot do anything else.
So surrender is not an act. Rather, it is a recognition. It is not an act. How can surrender be an act? How can you surrender? If you surrender, then how will you call it surrender when you remain the master? If you surrender, then you remain the “willer,” the surrender has been willed. They are diametrically opposite. You cannot will surrender. So surrender is not an act; rather, it is a recognition – the recognition of the phenomenon of will-lessness. There is no will, so you cannot will.
You cannot do anything, everything is just happening. You have happened, and all else that has followed has just been a happening. To feel this, to know this, is a recognition. Suddenly you become aware of the fact that there is no will in you. With this recognition ego disappears, because the ego can exist only if there is will.
So ego means the totality of willed acts. If there is will, then you can be. If there is no will, you disappear. Then you are just a wave in a great infinite ocean and you cannot will anything. You are as a happening; you will not be as a happening. What can a wave do in an infinite ocean? It has been “waved” by the ocean. It is not, it only appears to be.
If you feel this, and this feeling is a deep search, digging down deep in yourself – is there any will? – then you find you are just a dead leaf blown by the wind. So sometimes you go north and sometimes you go south – and the dead leaf may begin to think that it is going south – only the wind is blowing and the dead leaf is following. If you go deep down in yourself you will become aware of a total will-lessness. The recognition of it is surrender. It is not an act. And if you surrender, if the surrender happens, there is no need to offer, you cannot.
So really, on the path of surrender, offering is not possible, because offering is really based on will: you offer, you are there. On the path of surrender offering happens, but the surrenderer never knows. He cannot know. He cannot say, “I have offered my mind to the divine.” Really, he cannot speak in terms of acts, he can only speak in terms of happenings. So at the most he can say. “The offering has happened.”
Without a will you cannot have an ego, and without an ego you cannot talk of anything as an act. So “happening” is the phenomenon on the path of surrender. Surrender itself is a happening.
But on the path of will there is a different process. The moment I say “the path of will,” the will is taken for granted. You do something. This is a fact on the path of will, taken for granted. It is never questioned, because those who follow the path of will say that even to question a thing is to accept will. Even to question a thing means the will is there. To question is an act, to answer is an act, to doubt is an act, to say no is an act. So the will cannot be questioned. On the path of will, the will cannot be questioned. That is a basic hypothesis.
On the path of surrender, will-lessness is the basic hypothesis. You cannot question that. So this must be understood: on every path something is a hypothesis. It is bound to be, because you have to begin somewhere and you have to begin in ignorance. Because of these two factors a hypothesis is needed. Even in science you begin with a hypothesis – something assumed which cannot be questioned – and if you question it, the whole edifice falls down.
For example, one of the most accurate, scientific dimensions is geometry, but you begin with a hypothesis. You begin with something taken as an assumption which can neither be proved nor disproved, because only that thing can be disproved which can be proved. So to begin with, you take something in ignorance, in faith. So, really, science is not as scientific as it looks. If you go back to the beginning every science begins with a hypothesis, and if you question the hypothesis, no answer is possible…and this is as it should be, because you cannot begin from nowhere.
Look at it in this way: if I come to a strange city and I ask someone where the person A lives, he may say, “A is a neighbor of B.” But I say, “This is not an answer at all because I do not know B either. So where does B live?” Then he says, “B is a neighbor of C.” But I say, “I am in a strange land. I don’t know anything about C or D or E, so please tell me in such a way that I can understand. Everything is unknown to me, so from where to begin?”
If he says, “D, E, F, G,” they are all hypothetical. So from where to begin? A beginning can only be possible if I assume one thing as known which is not really known, otherwise no answer is possible. This is the situation, this is how we are in this world: everything is unknown, so from where to begin? If you say we must begin with knowledge, then how can you begin? When everything is unknown, how can you begin with something as a known fact? Then you cannot begin. If you begin with an unknown fact, then too you cannot begin.
A hypothesis means an unknown fact taken in faith as known. A hypothesis means an unknown fact knowingly taken as known. Then you can begin. So a hypothesis cannot be questioned – nowhere, not even in mathematics.
So on the path of will, will is the hypothesis, and on the path of surrender, will-lessness is the hypothesis. So if one path appeals to you, you will not be able to comprehend the other, because both have opposite hypotheses. If will-lessness appeals to you, then will does not have any appeal, then it is absurd. If will appeals to you, then surrender is meaningless.
With will, it is taken for granted that you can do. So now the question is: What to do? You can do something which leads you away from the divine and you can do something which leads you nearer to him. And you are responsible – I have discussed that yesterday. How can you will eventually to be near and, ultimately, totally with That? But remember this fact: that will is taken as a hypothesis. Once you take it as a hypothesis you go on willing; ultimately you will totally – that is, your mind is arrowed totally towards That. In that total tension, on that climax and peak, will dissolves, because perfection is death. The moment anything is perfect it dies.
That is why Lao Tzu says, “Never be perfect. Stop halfway – never go to the end.” If you go to the end, success will become failure and life will become death. If you go to the very end love will turn into hate, friendship will be reduced to enmity, because perfection means death. And when something dies, it dies into the polar opposite.
When will is perfect, when mind is wholly arrowed, will dies. The will disappears because perfection is the point of evaporation – just like water evaporates at a hundred degrees heat. The hundred-degree limit is the perfection. As far as water is concerned, the heat has come to its peak. Now if the heat continues to be, the water will not be there, and if the water wants to be there, then the heat must not come up to the peak. So when you are a hundred percent will you are on the verge of explosion; you will die, your will will die. The very phenomenon of will disappears. When will disappears, you come to the same point where one who begins with will-lessness comes. Now it is will-lessness.
So either zero or perfection: both bring the same ending. It will depend on you, on your type of mind. If you can conceive of will-lessness, then there is no question, but that is difficult. Not only difficult, in a certain way it is impossible. It is inconceivable. It happens, sometimes it happens. But that happening also has a long, long effort of will. Many, many lives lived according to the will give you the experience that you have been dreaming of – and one who has willed for a long time and yet reaches nowhere, may come to a point where suddenly he becomes aware that he is working with something which is not.
Buddha, for example: he reached the ultimate through will-lessness. But in this life he worked very arduously on the path of will for six years. He went to every teacher, inquired about every path, endeavored his best, tried everything that was taught and said. He did everything that a human being can do, and with every teacher he worked hard. No teacher was able to say, “You are not achieving because you are not working,” because he was working even more than the teacher. So every teacher had to say to him, “I cannot say that you are not working – you are working hard, impossibly hard – but now this is all I can teach you. You must go somewhere else.”
So he went around to every teacher, worked on every method. In those times Bihar was a very potential place. Such great peaks have happened only twice. Once it was in Athens, in the Greek civilization. Athens was a very potential city, a very potential situation happened there. And another time was in Bihar; it happened that Bihar became the peak of all that mind can do. In Bihar, in Buddha’s time, every method had been evolved and every method had its own teacher, its own master, and Buddha worked with every one. He worked so hard and so sincerely that every teacher had to ask him to leave because he had worked totally and nothing was coming out of it.
Really, he was not the man meant for the path of will. Mahavira, a contemporary of Buddha, reached through the path of will and achieved. But Buddha could not achieve. Frustrated, after working hard in every way, in a sudden moment of helplessness…. He felt helpless. He had done everything and nothing was achieved, and he remained the same with no transformation. A total frustration set in, and one day he left everything.
Previously, he had left “the world”: that was the first renunciation. But the second one, which is not mentioned in the scriptures, was greater. The Buddhists don’t talk about it. A second, greater renunciation happened: Buddha left the path of will after six years of tortuous effort. He said, “I feel helpless – and it seems that nothing is possible, nothing can be done, so I leave all efforts.”
That was a full-moon night and he was sitting under a tree. He had left the world; now, on that evening, he left all religions, all philosophies, all techniques. He relaxed under the tree. For the first time, after lives and lives, he could relax…because somehow or other we are always working, doing, achieving. But on that evening there was no achieving mind in him. He was so totally helpless that time ceased, future dropped, desires became meaningless. Effort was not possible; will was not found at all.
So he was dead, really dead – psychologically dead. He was alive only in the sense that a tree is alive – with no desires, with no future, with no possibility. He was just like the tree he was lying under. Conceive of it. Try to conceive of it. If there are no desires and no future and no morning to follow, and nothing is to be achieved and everything has been just absurd and the thought that “I cannot do” penetrates deeply, then what is the difference between you and the tree? No difference. He was as relaxed as the tree. He was as relaxed as the river flowing by.
He slept. This sleep was strange – there was not even a dream, because dreams belong to desires, effort, will. He slept as trees sleep. The sleep was total. It was just like death – no movement of the mind, no motivation inside. Everything stopped. Time stopped.
In the morning at five o’clock he opened his eyes. Rather, it would be good to say that the eyes opened, because there was no motivation. Just as the eyes dropped in the evening, in the morning they opened. Refreshed by the night, refreshed by relaxation, refreshed by a deep desirelessness, Buddha opened his eyes. The last star was disappearing in the sky, and it is said that just by seeing the last star disappear Buddha became awakened. He realized.
What happened?…because there was no effort; effort had ceased. There was not even desire. Now there was not even frustration – because frustration is part of desire and expectation. If expectations really cease, there is no frustration. He was not asking, he was not praying, he was not meditating, he was not doing at all. He was just there, empty. When the last star disappeared, something disappeared in him also. He became just space, he became just nothingness. This is surrender, with no feeling of surrender – because who is to surrender to whom? But this also happened as a culminating peak of long efforts.
This is what I mean to say: one has to begin with will. Begin with will. If you are the type who can reach to perfect will, you will just disappear from that peak. If you are not the type, then you will reach a perfection of frustration, and from that peak of frustration you will disappear. If the first is the case, will will be known as the path; if the second is the case, then surrender.
But begin with will. You cannot begin with surrender, because surrender cannot have any beginning. Action can have a beginning, but how can a happening have a beginning? You can begin with action; you cannot begin with happening – that is the difference. You can begin with something to do, but how can you begin with surrender?
So begin with will and put your whole being into it. Only then will you be able to know whether this path can work for you or not. If it can work, then it is okay. Then you reach to the most perfect ego, and when the ego is perfect the bubble bursts. Or, if you are not of that type, then you will go round and round and round and round…and frustration and frustration. Then you reach another peak, the peak of frustration, and surrender happens.
So even for surrender don’t think that you don’t have to do anything – remember this. Don’t think – otherwise mind is very cunning and the mind can say, “Surrender is our way, that means I am not going to do anything. Surrender is my way.” This is a cunning deception. If surrender is your way then surrender can happen this very moment, because surrender needs no time. There is no tomorrow necessary for it. If you say, “Surrender is my way,” then don’t wait for tomorrow, because surrender can come just here and now. No effort is needed in surrender, so no time is necessary.
If it is not coming just this moment, then know very well surrender is not your way. Mind is deceiving; mind is just trying to postpone effort. And mind can do everything. Mind can rationalize: “There is no need to will because there is no will, so I am ready to be on the path of will-lessness.” But remember well that your “readiness” will not do. Your readiness is not really a readiness: your preparedness is not really a qualification for surrender. Your total helplessness is the qualification. Really, are you totally helpless? Have you felt it, that nothing can be done? If you feel it, then surrender can happen this very moment.
Surrender cannot be postponed; will can be postponed. So with will you can take time, lives, and you can go on working slowly. But with surrender there is no go, and you cannot think of the future – future is not allowed. So if you say, “Surrender is my way and someday it will happen,” you are deceiving yourself. If surrender is your way, then surrender would have happened already.

Someone asked Mozart, “Who is your teacher? From whom have you learned your music?”
Mozart said, “No one is my teacher. I have learned it myself, alone.”
So the questioner said, “Then tell me, can I also learn it?”
Mozart said, “But I never asked anybody this question. Even to know this you have come to ask me, so it will be difficult for you to learn music by yourself. Even this you have to ask someone else – whether you can learn music without any teacher. A teacher is even needed to decide this. So you will not be able.”
The man persisted. He said, “Why? When you are able, why am I not?”
Mozart said, “If you were capable of it you would have done it already.”

So if surrender can happen, and if you are really ready for it, it would have happened. You cannot choose it. Choose will, because will has an affinity with choice. With surrender, choice has no affinity. Choice needs will, so choose will, work hard. There are only two types. Either you succeed or you fail, but work so hard that if you succeed you succeed totally, or if you fail you fail totally, and that totality will decide.
Mild efforts and mediocre efforts lead nowhere, because you can never decide what your type is with mediocre efforts. With mild, lukewarm efforts you can never decide what your type is. You can never know. Work hard! Either succeed totally or fail totally. Both the ways you will reach the same point. If you succeed totally, then will disappears. Being perfect, it dies. If you fail totally, then will-lessness becomes a recognition and surrender follows.
All efforts are on paths of the will. When someone tries with his whole heart and fails, then the other path opens. It is a sudden path! It is like an emergency door. In any air crash you have emergency doors. You may not even be aware of them. You need not be. Ordinarily, you open, you enter and you come out of the common, the usual door. The emergency door opens only when there is an emergency and total failure. Now the usual door will not do.
Surrender is an emergency door. You begin with the usual – the will. When will fails totally, the emergency door opens and you are out of it. If you succeed, then there is no need for the emergency door to be opened, you may not even become aware of it. You may reach your destination without the awareness that there was a door, an emergency door, which could have opened any moment.
So you cannot begin with surrender – no one can. Everyone has to begin with will. The only point to remember is: be total in it so that you can decide either way.

Osho,
You have often described mind as a collection of past experiences and memories which are all dead.
Even its apparent vitality is not its own; it is supplied from the source of the being.
Last night you said that mind was the only thing which one can offer to God. But is it worth offering?
Three points to be understood. First, mind has two meanings: one – the content; another – the container. When I say “content,” I mean thoughts, memories, the dead past, the accumulation of it. But that is only the content. If the whole content is thrown out, then the container remains. That container you can offer. These thoughts, memories, the past, are really worthless, not worth offering – but the container is. Mind has two meanings, so whenever mind is written with a capital M it means “the container. That container you can offer, and that is the meaning of the sutra: The mind constantly arrowed towards That – the container.
Constantly arrowed towards That means “now the container has no other contents than That” – no thought, no memory, no past, no desires, no future, nothing. Now the mind, as container, has only one content – That. This is the offering.
These contents are really dead, because your mind absorbs them only when they are dead. For example, your mind either moves in the past or in the future. When it moves in the past, it moves among the dead – everything has died, nothing is alive. The past is nowhere except in your memory.
Where is the past? It is nowhere. You cannot find it anywhere. It is only in your memory. If I have some memory that is private, secret to me, and if it is just my memory and no one knows about it, then if I die where will that memory be? It will not be anywhere. What will be the difference? Whether it ever was or not – what will be the difference? Whether it ever existed or not, there will be no difference.
The dead past is only in the memory, it is nowhere else, and because of this past the future becomes projected. Future is there only because of past. I loved you yesterday, so I want to love you tomorrow, I want to repeat the experience. I heard your song, so I want to hear it again, I want to repeat. The past wants to repeat itself, the dead wants to be born again, so the future is created.
These are the contents of the mind: past and future. If both these contents drop and your mind becomes just vacant, thoughtless, contentless, then you are just here and now, in the present, with no past, with no future, and That is present here and now. That is present in everything, simultaneously. When your mind is not – I mean when your past and future are not – you become aware of That, and in that awareness the experience of the That is the only content. This is what is meant by Mind constantly arrowed…is the offering: nothing should be a content of the mind except the universal existence.
When I say “offer the mind,” I mean the container – because you can offer the contents, but they are meaningless, they are dead. When you offer the container – the living mind, the living capacity to know, the living capacity to be – when you offer that, it is an offering. And it is not ordinary: it is rare because it is arduous. It is worth offering, and whenever there is a happening, whenever a Buddha or a Krishna or a Christ offers himself, offers the mind to the divine, it is not only that a Buddha or a Jesus is enriched, the divine is also enriched.
This will be very difficult to understand. When a Buddha is offered to the divine, the divine is enriched also – because even in Buddha the divine flowers, even in Buddha the divine reaches to a peak. So the divine is not something set apart. It is not something which is not in us. So offering is not something made to someone else. It is to the common pool of consciousness, it is to the common existence, the common being. So when a Buddha is offered, Buddha is enriched because Buddha becomes the total. But the total is also enriched, because through Buddha a peak has been touched.
The divine lives through you, so when you fall the divine falls, when you rise the divine rises, when you laugh the divine laughs, when you weep the divine weeps – because he is not something set apart. He is not an observer sitting far off in heaven just looking, he is in you. So every act, every gesture is his. So whatsoever is done, is done with him, through him, by him, to him.
There are stories…they are beautiful, they are poetic, and they show much. It is said that when Buddha achieved enlightenment the whole universe became blissful: flowers were showered from the sky, deities began to dance around him, Indra himself – the king of all the devas – came down with folded hands, he surrendered at Buddha’s feet. Trees began to flower out of season; birds began to sing out of season. The whole existence became a celebration.
This is poetic. lt has never happened like that, but in a deep sense it has happened. It is symbolic – because it is how it should be. When someone somewhere achieves buddhahood, how is it possible that the whole existence is not enriched? The whole universe will become happy, it will feel the vibrations. So a fact has been shown through poetic symbols.
But there are foolish, stupid minds who go on thinking that either this should be a historic fact, or otherwise it must be a lie. They have only two alternatives. They say, “This must be a historic fact, so where is the proof that flowers came upon the trees out of season? Where is the proof? Historic proof is needed, and if it is not there then it is a lie!” They don’t know that there is a realm beyond fact and beyond lies – the realm of poetry that expresses many things which cannot be expressed otherwise. It is just an indication that the whole world became a celebration. It must be so, it has to be so, it has been so.
So when this mind is offered, the contentless mind, simply the container – purified, pure, empty – when this container is offered, it is worth offering. Even the divine is enriched, because the divine becomes more divine. So another thing: “God” is not a static entity, it is a creative force, a dynamic force. So it is not only that man is evolving, God is also evolving. For those of us who are confined to ordinary logic God cannot evolve, because to us, if he evolves, then he is not perfect. How can perfection evolve? Ordinary logic cannot conceive that something can be more perfect than perfect. It cannot conceive – it looks illogical.
But life is not confined to your logic, and there are possibilities that a perfection can be more perfect, more enriched. A perfection can evolve. It is perfection at every moment; still, it is not static. For example, a dancer: every gesture is perfect. Every moment, every gesture, is perfect. Still there is a dynamic movement, and the total is more perfect than the parts. Each dance is perfect; still, another dance can be more perfect.
Mahavira has a very beautiful concept. He says that there are infinite perfections, multi-perfections, so God is evolving. To me, God is an evolving force; otherwise there can be no evolution. Through evolution God evolves; if he is not evolving, then there is no evolution anywhere. This is the concept of That: if there is a flower, then he is flowering there; if there is a man, then he is “manning” there. So whatsoever happens, it happens to him; and nothing can happen without him, outside of him. So when Buddha happens, the total becomes more.
Buddha says, “Do not go to any deity to worship. Be enlightened, and they will come to worship you,” and he shows and he says it not as a theory – he knows it. Deities have come to worship him. This has been an experience. So this is something to be pondered over. Only Buddhists and Jainas have said this, that when you are enlightened the deities will come and worship you because, they say, deities are not without desires, and when you are enlightened you are desireless.
Even an Indra is not without desires. Deities may be living in heaven, but they are with desires. So with Buddha and Mahavira, human dignity was raised to its ultimate. If you can become desireless then everything will worship you, because the desireless consciousness is one with That. That contentless mind is not only worth offering: the divine needs it, the divine waits for it. When a child returns enlightened, the father is enriched, the home is enriched.
Really, when a child returns enlightened, when the father sees his child enlightened, the father cannot be the same. So when a buddha flowers, the whole universe flowers with him. He shows the potentiality, the peak possibility. Now you may not attain it, but you may rest assured that you can attain it. The whole universe becomes confident with a buddha happening. The whole universe becomes a promise, a certainty. The same can happen to each particle, to each “monad,” to each mind – and now it is up to you.

When Buddha was dying, Ananda said to Buddha, “When will you be back?”
Buddha said, “It is impossible. I will not be back again.”
Ananda began to weep.
Buddha asked him, “Why are you weeping? You have been with me for forty years continuously. If you are yet not profited by me, why do you ask for my next coming?”
Ananda said, “It is not for me that I am asking. Even if we have not attained to That, you have attained, and we have become certain. And it is more than enough. We have become certain! Now this certainty cannot be lost. I am asking for others who have not seen you. So when will you be coming back? Because if they get a glimpse of such a certainty as you, only then can they proceed on the path.
“I am not asking for myself. For lives together I may wander, but this certainty cannot be lost. I have seen you, and I have seen the peak possibility. So it is not for me, but for others. When will you be coming back? Because you are the only certainty – we look at you and doubts drop. We look at you – we may not be capable of doing the same and following you – but in that moment of looking at you, we are you in a sense. So when will you be coming back?”

So the offering is not only worthwhile; it is being awaited. The divine waits, the total waits for you to come back enriched, to come home with your potentiality actualized, for the seed to come not as a seed but as a full manifestation. But with a “content-full” mind, offering is worthless – you are offering rubbish.
Something more about the first question:
In reference to the efforts regarding meditation, what is meant by the state of total will?
What state of meditation will be called the total-will stage of the final success?
The first meaning of “total” is that you are in it without any part outside – with no withholding, with no division. So any method of meditation will do. If you are totally in it, absorbed, not a part standing outside, if you can just cry “Rama” totally with not a part as an observer in you, if you become the cry and not even a part is observing that you are crying “Rama,” if you become the cry – then it is total, and then a single cry is enough. There is no need to go on repeating “Rama-Rama-Rama” – there is no need. One total cry in which nothing is left is enough. So only you can decide whether you are total in something or not.
The second meaning of totality is that whatsoever you are doing, whatever technique of meditation, your doing must be without any doubt. A very minute doubt will make it partial; a very small doubt will not allow it to be total. But that also you can decide – whether there is any doubt. We go on doing things with doubts inside. Those doubts kill every effort. lt is not so much that you are not reaching because of not enough effort. It is more because of your doubts standing behind. So whatsoever you do, that skeptical part of the mind goes on denying, goes on waiting to be skeptical. Even if you achieve something, the doubting mind will create doubts. Totality means there is no doubt. Effort becomes total.
Thirdly, we have many layers of energy, so you may be making a total effort on the first layer and you may not be aware of the second layer at all. All the layers should become committed, involved, then it becomes total. So when you are doing with one layer and you feel you are doing totally, don’t be deceived so soon. Go on doing, and when you feel that “Now nothing can be done, I have done everything and there is no energy left,” continue. This is the moment: continue! Soon you will become aware that a sudden rush of energy is coming to you from the second layer. A new earth has been broken. Then go on doing this…. And when you are totally involved with all the layers, how will you know?
There are signs. One sign is that when all the layers have been broken and your total energy is involved, total energy is involved, you will never feel exhausted. You will never feel that the point has come when “I cannot do more.” That feeling always comes when one layer is exhausted. When the second layer is exhausted, that feeling will come again. There are seven layers. When the seventh is broken, that feeling will never come again – never. You will not feel that “Now I cannot do more.” You will go on doing more and more and more, and you will feel that still more is left. Then you are total in it.
The total is never exhausted, remember. Only the part is exhausted, the total is never exhausted. You cannot empty it: the more you empty it, the more it is filled. So whatsoever happens with your totality cannot be exhausted. If love happens with your totality, then love cannot be exhausted. If meditation happens with your totality, then meditation cannot be exhausted.

I am reminded of Bokuju, a Zen patriarch who realized, who became enlightened when he was twenty years of age. But he continued meditating.
His teacher came and said, “Bokuju what are you doing? Now there is no need. I see you have become enlightened.”
But Bokuju said, “But how can I end meditation? No end is coming. I go on and on and on and I am not exhausted. So how can I end it? How can I come out of it? I see no end to it.”
The teacher said, “When one falls into the infinite there is only a beginning, there is no end. Come out of it. Come out and move! Of course, I know you cannot come out of it now, but move! It will be with you. Don’t go on sitting.”
He was continuously sitting for seven weeks after his enlightenment. He was just sitting. For his teacher, for the monastery, there were seven weeks. He became enlightened, there was light all around, he was transformed. Everyone became aware that something had happened. His teacher came and went, came and went every day. He waited for when Bokuju would open his eyes and he would talk about it, but he was not opening his eyes. Then ultimately the teacher had to stop him and ask him to come out.
Bokuju said, “But how can I come out? It is not ending at all. There is no end to it. They say, ‘You have been sitting here for seven weeks continuously, it is so long!’ But I don’t remember. I feel as if not a single moment has passed. There has been no time for me.”

So when the total energy is there working, there will be no end to it and time will drop. You cannot feel time. You will feel time only with partial energy because it is exhausted. Time is felt only with something limited; otherwise time cannot be felt. Time is really a feeling of limitations. So whatsoever has a limit, you will feel time around it. It is relative.
So this strange phenomenon happens: if your whole day has been vacant without any events, just empty, nothing of any note, nothing worthwhile, if the whole day just passed by, then time will seem to be more when it is passing. Unoccupied time will look very long. You will feel that the day is not going to end at all, that it has become so lengthy. But that is only when it is passing. If you remember afterwards, then the day will look very small – because later on you cannot feel the time without events, so the day will look very short.
We feel time around certain things. So when you are on a holiday and many things are happening, on that day the day will look short – because it was so filled it becomes comparatively small. But if you remember your holiday when you are back home it looks very long – because each event spread in a sequence becomes very long.
Bokuju said, “I don’t know about time. What has happened to time? It stopped.” Mahavira says that the basic element that changes totally when one enters samadhi is time – there is a stopping of time.
Someone asked Jesus, “What will happen in your kingdom of God?” and he said, “There will be time no longer.” This is a basic indication that time will stop, because time can be felt only with partial energies.
That’s why a child feels time less, because he is more full. An old man feels time more, because he is now empty, emptying. So with an old man time becomes a problem. With a child, time is not a problem at all; he lives in a timelessness. The same happens with civilization. Whenever a civilization becomes over-conscious of time it means the civilization is going, by and by, towards death. Whenever a civilization is absolutely unaware of time it means it is in its childhood – innocent. It is not old. Time consciousness means death is coming near. So the more death you feel, the more time you will feel.
In India, we have not felt time so much because we have a conception of a circle of continuous births. So each time you die it is not death – again you are reborn. So, really, India destroyed the concept of death totally. It is not a death at all if you are reborn again. That’s why India never became time conscious. We are so lethargic, and we can waste time so easily. The reason is that death is not there in the Indian mind; after death there is birth. So time is infinite, and there is no hurry.
But the American mind, the Western mind, has become very time conscious, and the reason is Christianity – because once you say that there is only one life and that this death is going to be the final one, that there is no rebirth, then death becomes very meaningful. Everything has to be taken in reference. If death is so final and occurs only once, time becomes very valuable, it cannot be lost. Then a strange phenomenon happens: the more you become conscious of time the less you can use it, you can only hurry and run…because you are in such a hurry the less you can use it. To use time you need a very, very patient attitude, a very slow-moving attitude; then only can you use it.
So when your mind is in a total effort of will, there will be no time and there will be no end to the energy coming. But these are all inner subjective feelings. You can ask, “Can we be deceived?” Yes, deception is possible. But whenever there is deception you will become aware. The awareness will come in this form: in any inner feeling, any inner realization, if you become doubtful whether it is true or imaginary, then it is certainly imaginary – because the truth is so self-evident that you cannot doubt it. The doubting mind just disappears.
So sometimes someone comes to me and says, “Tell me whether my kundalini has risen or not. My teacher says my kundalini has risen, so tell me.” So I tell them that unless it becomes self-evident to you, do not believe anyone. When that phenomenon happens you will not go to ask anyone whether it has happened or not. If someone comes and asks you, “Tell me whether I am alive or not,” what will you say to him? Certainly he is dead! If even this has to be asked, then certainly he is dead.
Life is a self-evident fact; no proof is needed. How do you feel your life? Do you have any proof of it? Is there any proof? How do you feel your life, how do you know you are alive? Is there ever a doubt whether “I am alive or not”?
Descartes began in that way. He began to seek some indubitable fact which cannot be doubted, so he went on: God can be doubted, heaven and hell can be doubted, everything can be doubted. Then ultimately he stumbled upon himself, and he began to think. “Can I doubt myself? Can I doubt about myself? Can I say I am or I am not?” Then he stumbled upon a self-evident truth, and he said, “Even if I say I am not, I am; so I cannot doubt this fact.” This fact begins to be his foundation. So he says, “Cogito ergo sum – I think, therefore I am. Even if I doubt, I think, therefore I am. So I cannot deny it.”
Life is a self-evident fact, you cannot doubt it. The same happens when more life happens to you. When you enter more life, when you enter total life, it is self-evident, no proof is needed, no witness is needed. Even if the whole world denies it you can laugh. The whole world may think you are mad, but you can laugh.
These are self-evident realizations, so I can describe them. But when they happen, you know; when they are there, you know. The knowing is evident in itself; it needs no outer proof, no outer witness. Your knowing becomes the only evidence.
That’s why mystics sometimes seem to be arrogant. They are not. They are the most humble people possible, but they look arrogant, and the arrogance is felt by us because they are so self-evidently true. They won’t give you any proofs, they won’t give you any arguments, they won’t give you any reasons. They say, “I know.”
This looks to us like arrogance, but the same is so, if I ask you, “How do you know you are alive?” What can you say? You can say only, “I know.” Is that arrogance? It is a simple fact. How can you express it except by saying, “I know and I know it self-evidently. Even for me there are no reasons why I am. I simply am.”
These Upanishads are such self-evident statements. They won’t argue with you. They go on saying, “This is this.” You cannot ask why, you can only ask how. They can tell you how you can achieve this. You cannot ask, “Why? Why is this this?”
So the moment you happen to be in totality, in that totality you will know it. It is such a phenomenon that you can doubt everything except it. You can doubt the whole world – except it. If the whole world stands against it as a witness, even then your feeling of its being true cannot be shaken.
That’s how a Jesus can die, a Mansoor can be killed. They can be killed, but they cannot be changed, converted. They cannot be converted. You can kill a Mansoor, you cannot convert him. He will go on saying the same thing. Mansoor was saying, “I am the God.” In Mohammedan eyes that is kufr – heresy, egoism. It is not a religious expression. A religious person must be humble, and this Mansoor goes on saying, “I am the God – Ana’l haq, aham brahmasmi – I am the brahman.” So they killed him. They thought that when they began to kill him he would come back to his senses, but he went on laughing, and someone asked, “Mansoor, why are you laughing?” Mansoor said, “I am laughing because you cannot kill a God. You cannot kill a God. Aham brahmasmi! Ana’l haq! I am the God!”
Jesus says as his last words, “Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do.” He asked the divine to forgive all those who were crucifying him because, “They do not know what they are doing.”
But Mansoor and Jesus, they are very arrogantly certain. That certainty comes from the self-evident-ness of truth. And everything can be doubted, but never a feeling that comes in your totality.
If you are a total will, then you will come to know something self-evident. If you are total surrender, then also you will come to know something self-evident. Even if you are a total doubter, then also you can come to something which is self-evident. But totality is everywhere a basic condition. You must be total in it, whole in it.