---
title: The Hidden Harmony 01
series: The Hidden Harmony 01-11
talk_number: 1
url: https://oshoworld.com/the-hidden-harmony-01
language: English
duration: 01:42:55
author: WESTERN MYSTICS
scraped_at: 2026-01-03T09:28:45.762213+00:00
---
The hidden harmony
is better than the obvious.

Opposition brings concord.
Out of discord
comes the fairest harmony.

It is in changing
that things find repose.

People do not understand
how that which is at variance with itself,
agrees with itself.

There is a harmony in the bending back,
as in the case of the bow and the lyre.

The name of the bow is life,
but its work is death.
I have been in love with Heraclitus for many lives. In fact, Heraclitus is the only Greek I have ever been in love with – except, of course, Mukta, Seema and Neeta!
Heraclitus is really beautiful. If he had been born in India, or in the East, he would have been known as a buddha. But in Greek history, philosophy, he was a stranger, an outsider. He is known in Greece not as an enlightened person, but as Heraclitus the Obscure, Heraclitus the Dark, Heraclitus the Riddling. Aristotle, the father of Greek philosophy and Western thought, thought him no philosopher at all and said, “At the most he is a poet,” but that too was difficult for him to concede. So later on in other works he said, “There must be some defect in Heraclitus’ character, something biologically wrong; that’s why he talks in such obscure ways and talks in paradoxes.” Aristotle thought that he was a little eccentric, a little mad – and Aristotle dominates the whole West. If Heraclitus had been accepted, the whole history of the West would have been totally different. He was not understood at all. He became more and more separate from the main current of Western thinking and the Western mind.
Heraclitus was like Gautam Buddha, Lao Tzu, Basho. The Greek soil was absolutely not good for him. He would have been a great tree in the East; millions would have profited and found the way through him. To the Greeks he was just outlandish, eccentric, something foreign, alien; he didn’t belong to them. That’s why his name has remained just on the side, in a dark corner; by and by, he has been forgotten.
At the moment when Heraclitus was born, precisely at that moment, humanity reached a peak: a moment of transformation. It happens with humanity just as it does with an individual: there are moments when changes happen. Every seven years the body changes, and it goes on changing. If you live for seventy years, your total biophysical system will change ten times. If you use those gaps when the body changes, it will be very easy to move into meditation.
For example, sex becomes important for the first time at fourteen; the body goes through a biochemical change. If at that moment you are introduced to the dimension of meditation, it will be very, very easy to move into it because the body is not fixed. The old pattern has gone and the new has yet to come – there is a gap. At twenty-one, again deep changes happen because every seven years the body completely renews itself; all the old cells drop away and new ones are formed. It happens again at thirty-five, and goes on. Every seven years your body comes to a point where the old goes and the new settles – then there is a transitory period. In that transitory period everything is liquid. If you want a new dimension to enter your life, that is precisely the moment.
It happens exactly the same way in the history of the whole of humanity. Every twenty-five centuries there comes a peak. If you use that moment, you can easily become enlightened. It will not be so easy at other times because at that peak the river itself is flowing in that direction; everything is fluid, nothing is fixed.
Twenty-five centuries ago in India, Gautam Buddha, Mahavira were born; in China, Lao Tzu, Chuang Tzu; in Iran, Zarathustra; in Greece, Heraclitus. They are the peaks. Never before were such peaks attained, or if they were attained they are not part of history because history starts with Jesus. You don’t know what happened twenty-five centuries ago. The moment is coming again; we are in a fluid state. The old is meaningless, the past has no significance for you, the future is uncertain – the gap is here. Humanity will again achieve a peak, the same peak as there was in Heraclitus’ time. If you are a little aware, you can use this moment – you can simply drop out of the wheel of life. When things are liquid, transformation is easy. When things are fixed, transformation is difficult.
You are fortunate that you are born in an age where things are again in a state of liquidity. Nothing is certain, all old codes and commandments have become useless. New patterns have yet not settled in. They will settle soon; man cannot remain unsettled forever because when you are unsettled there is insecurity. Things will settle again, this moment will not last forever; it is only for a few years. If you can use it, you can reach a peak which will be very, very difficult to reach at other times. If you miss it, the moment is missed again for another twenty-five centuries.
Remember, life moves in a cycle; everything moves in a cycle. The child is born, has his youth, old age, his death. It moves just as the seasons do: summer comes, rains follow; winter comes, and it goes on in a circle. The same happens in the dimension of consciousness. Every twenty-five centuries the circle is complete and before the new circle starts there is a gap that you can escape through; the door is open for a few years.
Heraclitus is a rare flowering; one of the most highly penetrating souls, and one of those souls who has become like Everest, the highest peak of the Himalayas. Try to understand him. It is difficult; that’s why he is called Heraclitus the Obscure. He is not obscure. To understand him is difficult; to understand him you will need a different type of being – that is the problem. So it is easy to categorize him as obscure and forget him.
There are two types of people. If you want to understand Aristotle you don’t need any change in your being, you simply need some information. A school can provide some information about logic, philosophy; you can collect some intellectual understanding and understand Aristotle. You need not change to understand him, you need only a few additions to your knowledge. The being remains the same, you remain the same. You need not have a different plane of consciousness; that is not the requirement. Aristotle is clear. If you want to understand him, a little effort is enough; anyone of an average mind and intelligence will understand him. To understand Heraclitus is going to be rough terrain, difficult because whatever knowledge you collect will not be of much help; a very cultivated head won’t be of any help. You will need a different quality of being, and that is difficult – you will need a transformation. Hence, he is called obscure.
He is not obscure. You are just below the level of being where he can be understood. When you reach that level of being, suddenly all the darkness around him disappears. He is one of the most luminous beings; he is not obscure, he is not dark – it is you who are blind. Always remember this because if you say he is dark, you are throwing the responsibility on him, you are trying to escape from a transformation that is possible through encountering him. Don’t say that he is dark. Say, “We are blind” or “Our eyes are closed.”
The sun is there in the sky. You can stand in front of it with closed eyes and say that it is dark, or you can stand with your eyes open in front of it, but the light will be so strong that your eyes will temporarily go blind. The light is too much to bear. It is unbearable, and suddenly, darkness. You open your eyes, the sun is there again, but it is too much so you feel the darkness. That’s the case with Heraclitus ? he is not dark. Either you are blind, or your eyes are closed, or there is a third possibility. When you look at Heraclitus, he is such a luminous being that your eyes simply lose the capacity to see. He is unbearable, the light is too much for you. You are not accustomed to such light and will need to make a few arrangements before you can understand him. When he’s talking he looks as if he is riddling, he looks as if he is enjoying riddles because he talks in paradoxes.
All those who have known always talk in paradoxes. There is something in it – they are not riddling, they are very simple. What can they do? If life itself is paradoxical, what can they do? Just to avoid paradoxes you can create neat and clean theories, but they will be false, they will not be true to life. Aristotle is very neat, clean; he looks like a well-managed garden. Heraclitus looks like riddles – he is a wild forest. With Aristotle there is no trouble; he has avoided the paradox, he has made a neat and clean doctrine – it appeals. You will be scared to face Heraclitus because he opens the door of life, and life is paradoxical. Buddha is paradoxical, Lao Tzu is paradoxical; all those who have known are bound to be paradoxical. What can they do? If life itself is paradoxical, they have to be true to life. Life is not logical. It is a logos, but it is not logic. It is a cosmos, it is not a chaos; it is not logic.
The word logos has to be understood because Heraclitus will use it; the difference between logos and logic also has to be understood. Logic is a doctrine about what is true, and logos is truth itself. Logos is existential, logic is not existential; logic is intellectual, theoretical. Try to understand. If you see life you will say that there is also death. How can you avoid death? If you look at life, it is implied. Every moment of life is also a moment of death; you cannot separate them. It becomes a riddle.
Life and death are not two separate phenomena; they are two faces of the same coin, two aspects of the same coin. If you penetrate deeply you will see that life is death and death is life. The moment you are born, you have started dying. If this is so, when you die you will start living again. If death is implied in life, life will be implied in death. They belong to each other, they are complementary. Life and death are just like two wings or two legs; you cannot move with only the right leg or the left leg. In life you cannot be a rightist or a leftist, you have to be both together. With doctrine you can be a rightist, or a leftist. Doctrine is never true to life and cannot be because doctrine, out of necessity, needs to be clean, neat, clear, and life is not that – life is vast. Somewhere, one of the greatest poets of the world, Whitman, has said, “I contradict myself because I am vast.”
You will attain a very tiny mind through logic – you cannot be vast. If you are afraid of contradiction you cannot be vast. You will have to choose, you will have to suppress, you will have to avoid the contradiction, you will have to hide it. Can it disappear by your hiding it? By just not looking at death, are you not going to die?
You can avoid death, you can have your back toward it, you can completely forget about it ? that’s why we don’t talk about death; it is not good manners. We don’t talk about it, we avoid it. Death happens every day, it is happening everywhere, but we avoid it. The moment a man dies we are in a hurry to be finished with him. We make our graveyards out of the town so nobody goes there, and we make graves in marble and write beautiful lines on them. We put flowers on the grave. What are you doing? ? you are trying to decorate it a little.
In the West, how to hide death has become a profession. There are professionals who help you avoid it, and make the dead body beautiful, as if it is still alive. What are you doing? Can this help in any way? Death is there. You are headed toward the graveyard; wherever you put it makes no difference – you will reach there. You are already on the way, standing in the queue waiting for the moment; just waiting in the queue to die. Where can you escape death?
Logic tries to be clear, and just to be clear it avoids. It says that life is life, death is death – they are separate. Aristotle says A is A, it is never B. That became the foundation stone of all Western thought: avoid the contradiction – love is love, hate is hate; love is never hate. This is foolish because all love implies hate, has to; that’s how nature is. You love a person and you hate the same person, you have to; you cannot avoid it. If you try to avoid it everything will become false. That’s why your love has become false; it is not true, it is not authentic. It cannot be sincere, it is a facade.
Why is it a facade? – because you are avoiding the other. You say, “You are my friend and a friend cannot be an enemy. You are my enemy, you cannot be my friend.” These are two aspects of the same coin – the enemy is a hidden friend and the friend is a hidden enemy. The other aspect is hidden, but it is there. But it will be too much for you. If you see both, it will be unbearable. If you see the enemy in the friend you will not be able to love him. If you see the friend in the enemy you will not be able to hate him. The whole of life will become a riddle.
Heraclitus is called “that Riddler.” He is not, he is true to life. He simply reports whatever it is. He has no doctrine about life, he is not a system-maker – he is simply a mirror. Whatever life is, he represents it. Your face changes, the mirror represents it; you are loving, the mirror represents it; the next moment you become hateful, the mirror represents it. The mirror is not riddling, it is true.
Aristotle is not like a mirror, he is like a dead photograph. It doesn’t change, it doesn’t move with life. That’s why Aristotle says, “There is some defect in the very character of this man Heraclitus.” The mind should be clear for Aristotle, systematic, rational; logic should be the goal of life and you should not mix the opposites. Who is mixing them? Heraclitus is not mixing them. They are there, mixed. Heraclitus is not responsible for them. How can you separate them if they are mixed in life itself? Yes, you can try in your books, but your books will be false. A logical statement is basically going to be false because it cannot be a life statement. A life statement is going to be illogical because life exists through contradictions.
Look at life; everywhere there is contradiction. Nothing is wrong in contradiction, it is just that it is unbearable for your logical mind. If you attain a mystical insight it becomes beautiful. Really, beauty cannot exist without it. If you cannot hate the same person you love, there will be no tension in your love. It will be a dead thing. There will be no polarity; everything will become stale. What happens? If you love a person, in the morning you love and by the afternoon it will have become hate. Why? What is the reason for it? Why is it so in life? ? because when you hate, you separate; the initial distance is again regained. Before you fell in love you were two separate individuals. When you fell in love you became a unity, you became a community.
You must understand this word community. It is very beautiful; it means common unity. You became a community, you attained a common unity. Community is beautiful for a few moments, but then it looks like slavery. To attain a common unity for a few moments is beautiful, it leads to a height, to a peak – but you cannot live on the peak forever. Who will live in the valley? The peak is beautiful only because the valley is there. If you cannot move to the valley again, the peak will lose all its peakness. It is because of the valley that it is a peak. If you make a house there you will forget that it is a peak – the whole beauty of love will be lost.
In the morning you love, by the afternoon you are filled with hate. You have moved to the valley, you have moved to the initial position where you were before you fell in love – now you are individuals again. To be individual is beautiful because it is a freedom. To be in the valley is also beautiful because it is a relaxation. To be in the dark valley is soothing, it helps you to regain balance. You are ready again to go to the peak; by the evening you are in love again. This is a process of parting and coming together – again and again. When you fall in love again after a hateful moment, it is a new honeymoon.
If there is no change life is static. If you cannot move to the opposite everything will become stale and boring. That’s why people who are too cultivated become boring because they always go on smiling, they are never angry. You insult them and they smile; you praise them and they smile; you condemn them and they smile. They are unbearable. Their smile is dangerous, and cannot be very deep; it remains just on the lips, it is a face. They are not smiling, they are just following a code; their smile is ugly.
You will always find that people who are always in love and never hate or get angry are superficial – because if you don’t move to the opposite, from where will you gain depth? Depth comes through a movement to the opposite. Love is hate. In fact, we shouldn’t use the words love and hate, we should use a single word, lovehate. A love relationship is a love-hate one – and it is beautiful! Nothing is wrong in hate because it is through hate that you gain love. Nothing is wrong in being angry because it is through anger that you come to a silent stillness.
Have you noticed? Every morning, airplanes pass over here making a loud noise. When the plane has passed over, a deep silence follows in its wake. It was not so silent before the plane came, no. When the plane has passed over, it is more silent. You are walking down a street on a dark night, suddenly a car comes. It passes by at full speed; your eyes are dazzled by the light – when the car has passed it is darker than before.
Everything lives through the opposite, through the tension of the opposite – and becomes deeper. Go away so that you can come near; move to the opposite so that you can come closer again.
A love relationship is one of falling again and again in a honeymoon. If the honeymoon is over and the thing has settled, it is already dead – anything that is settled is dead. Life remains through an unsettled movement – anything that is secure is already in the grave. Your bank balances are your graveyards; that is where you have died. If you are totally secure you are no longer alive because to be alive is basically to move between the opposites.
Illness is not a bad thing; it is through illness that you regain health. Everything fits in the harmony – that’s why Heraclitus is called the Riddler. Lao Tzu would have understood him deeply, but Aristotle could not understand him. Unfortunately, Aristotle became the source of Greek thought; even more unfortunate is that Greek thought became the whole base of the Western mind.
What is Heraclitus’s deepest message? Understand this so you can follow ? he does not believe in things, he believes in processes; process is God to him. If you watch closely, you will see that things don’t exist in the world; everything is a process. In fact to use the word is, is existentially wrong because everything is becoming. Nothing is in a state of isness, nothing!
You say, “This is a tree.” By the time you say it, it has grown; your statement is already false. The tree is never static, so how can you use the word, is? It is always becoming, becoming something else. Everything is growing, moving, in a process. Life is movement. It is like a river – always moving. Heraclitus says, “You cannot step in the same river twice,” ? because by the time you come to step in it the second time, it has moved. It is a flow. Can you meet the same person twice? Impossible! You were also here yesterday morning – am I the same? Are you the same? Both rivers have changed. You may be here again tomorrow, but you will not find me; someone else will be here.
Life is changing. Heraclitus says, “Only change is eternal.” Only change never changes. Everything else changes. He believes in a permanent revolution. Everything is in revolution. It is how it is here. To be means to become. To remain where you are means to move; you cannot stay, nothing is static. Even the hills, the Himalayas, are not static; they are moving, moving fast. They are born and they die. The Himalayas is one of the youngest mountain ranges in the world, and it is still growing. It has not reached its peak yet, it is very young – every year it grows one foot. There are old mountains whose peaks have been attained; now they are old, falling down, their backs are bent.
These walls you see around you, every particle of them is in movement. You cannot see the movement because it is very subtle and fast. Remember, now physicists agree with Heraclitus, not with Aristotle. Whenever any science reaches nearer to reality, it has to agree with Lao Tzu and Heraclitus. Now physicists say that everything is in movement. Eddington has said, “The only word which is false is rest.” Nothing is at rest, nothing can be; it is a false word, it doesn’t correspond to any reality. The word is, is just in language. In life, in existence, there is no is; everything is becoming. When Heraclitus talks about the river – and the symbol of the river is very, very deep with him – he says, “You cannot step in the same river twice.” He also says, “Even if you do, you are the same and you are not the same.” Just on the surface you look the same. Not only has the river changed, you have also changed.
It happened…

A man came to Buddha to insult him – he spat on his face. Buddha wiped his face and asked the man, “Have you anything more to say?” – as if he had said something. The man was puzzled because he never expected this type of response. He went away.
The next day he came again – because he couldn’t sleep the whole night; he felt more and more that he had done something absolutely wrong, he felt guilty. The next morning he came to Buddha, fell at his feet and said, “Forgive me!”
Buddha replied, “Who will forgive you now? ? because the man you spat on is no longer the same, and the man you were when you spat is no longer the same. So who will forgive whom? Forget it, now nothing can be done about it. It cannot be undone – finished! Nobody is there, both parties are dead. What can be done? You are a new man and I am a new man.”

This is Heraclitus’s deepest message: everything flows and changes; everything moves, nothing is static. The moment you cling, you miss reality. Your clinging becomes the problem because reality changes and you cling.
You loved me yesterday; now you are angry. I cling to yesterday and say, “You have to love me because yesterday you were loving and said that you would always love me – now what has happened?” But what can you do? Yesterday when you said that you would love me always, it was not false, but it was not a promise either. It was simply the mood, and I believed too much in the mood. At that moment you felt it, that you would love me always and always and always, forever. Remember, it was not untrue. It was true in the moment, that was the mood, but now that mood has gone. The one who said it is no longer there. And if it is gone, it is gone; nothing can be done. You cannot force love. That’s what we are doing – and making so much misery out of it. The husband says, “Love me!” The wife says, “Love me because you promised – have you forgotten the days when we were courting?” But they are no longer there. Those people are no longer there either. Just remember yourself as a young man of twenty ? are you the same man? Much has passed; the Ganges has flowed too much – you are no longer there.
I have heard…

One night Mulla Nasruddin’s wife said, “You no longer love me. You never kiss me, never hug me. Remember when we were courting? You used to bite me and I loved it so much! Can’t you bite me again?”
Nasruddin got out of bed and started walking. His wife said, “Where are you going?”
He replied, “To the bathroom to get my teeth.”

No, you cannot step in the same river twice. It’s impossible. Don’t cling; if you cling you create a hell for yourself. Clinging is hell, and a nonclinging consciousness is always in heaven. One moves with the mood, accepts it, and accepts the change; there is no grudge, no complaint about it because this is how life is ? things are. You can fight, but you cannot change.
When someone is young, of course there are different moods because youth has different seasons and moods. How can an old man experience the same? An old man will look very foolish with those moods. How can an old man say the same thing? Everything has changed. When you are young you are romantic, inexperienced, dreamy. When you are old all the dreams have gone. There is nothing bad about it because when the dreams are gone, you are nearer and closer to reality – now you understand more. You are less of a poet because you cannot dream now, but nothing is wrong. Dreaming was a mood, a season – it changes. One has to be true to the state in which one finds oneself at a certain point.
Be true to your changing self because that is the only reality. That’s why Buddha says, “There is no self.” You are a river. There is no self because there is nothing unchanging in you. Buddha was thrown out of India because the Indian mind, particularly the brahmins, the Hindus, believed in a permanent self, atma. They have always said, “Something is permanent,” and Buddha said, “Only change is permanent – nothing is permanent.”
Why do you want to be a permanent thing? Why do you want to be dead? ? because only a dead thing can be permanent. Waves come and go, that’s why the ocean is alive. If waves stop, everything in the ocean will stop. It will be a dead thing. Everything lives through change – and change means changing to the other polarity. You move from one pole to another; that’s how you become alive and fresh again and again. During the day you work hard, and at night you relax and go to sleep. In the morning you are alive and fresh to work again. Have you ever noticed the polarity?
Work is against relaxation. If you work hard you become tense, tired, exhausted, but then you fall into the deep valley of rest, a deep relaxation. The surface is far away, you move to the center. You are no longer the identity you are on the surface, no longer the name, the ego; nothing is carried from the surface. You simply forget who you are, and in the morning you are fresh. This forgetfulness is good, it makes you fresh. Just try not sleeping for three weeks – you will go mad because you would have forgotten to move to the opposite.
If Aristotle is right, and if you don’t sleep at all, and don’t move to the opposite, you will become an enlightened man. You will be mad! It is because of Aristotle that there are so many mad people in the West. Sooner or later the whole West is going to be mad if they don’t listen to the East, or to Heraclitus. It is bound to be so because you have lost the polarity. Logic will say something else. Logic will say, “Rest the whole day, practice rest the whole day, so that in the night you can fall into a deep sleep.” This is logical. “Practice rest!” This is logical. This is what rich people do; they rest the whole day, have insomnia and then say, “We cannot sleep.” They are practicing the whole day – lying on their beds, their easy chairs, resting and resting and resting. At night, suddenly they find that they cannot sleep. They have followed Aristotle, they are logical.

One day Mulla Nasruddin went to his doctor. He entered the room coughing. The doctor said, “It sounds better.”
Nasruddin replied, “Of course, it has to sound better – because I practiced it the whole night.”

If you practice rest the whole day, at night you will be restless. You will change sides again and again; that is just an exercise the body is doing so that some rest becomes possible. No – in life you cannot find a man more wrong than Aristotle. Move to the opposite. Work hard in the day and you will go into a deeper sleep at night. Go deeper in sleep, and in the morning you will find that you are capable of doing tremendous work, and will have infinite energy. Through rest one gains energy; through work one gains rest – just the opposite.
People come to me and say, “We have insomnia, we cannot sleep, so tell us some way to relax” – they are Aristotelian. I say to them, “There is no need for you to relax. Just go for a walk, a long walk, run madly – two hours in the morning, two in the evening, and rest will follow automatically. It always follows! You don’t need relaxation techniques; you need active meditation techniques, not relaxation. You are already too relaxed; that’s what the insomnia is showing – there is no need for more.”
Life moves through one opposite to another. Heraclitus says, “This is the secret, the hidden harmony; this is the hidden harmony.” He is very poetic, he has to be. He cannot be philosophic because philosophy means reason. Poetry can be contradictory; poetry can say things which philosophers will be ashamed to say – poetry is truer to life. Philosophers just go around and around; they never hit the center point, they beat about the bush. Poetry simply hits directly.
If you want any parallels to Heraclitus in the East, you will find them in the Zen masters, Zen poets, particularly in the poetry known as haiku. Basho is one of the great masters of haiku. Basho and Heraclitus are absolutely close, in a deep embrace; they are almost one. Basho has not written anything in a philosophical way; he has written in small haikus, just three-line, seventeen-syllable haikus, just small pieces. Heraclitus has also written fragments; he has not written a system like Hegel, Kant; he is not a systematizer – just oracular maxims. Each fragment is complete in itself, just like a diamond; each cut to its perfection in itself, no need to be related to another. He has spoken in an oracular way.
The whole method of the oracular maxim has disappeared from the West. Only Nietzsche wrote in the same way. His book: Thus Spake Zarathustra consists of oracular maxims – since Heraclitus, only Nietzsche. In the East, everyone who has become enlightened has written in that way. That is the way of the Upanishads, the Vedas, Buddha, Lao Tzu, Chuang Tzu, Basho; just maxims. They are so small that you have to penetrate them, and just by trying to understand them you will change, your intellect unable to cope.
Basho says in a small haiku:
An ancient pond
…a frog jumps in
the sound of water
Finished! He has said everything. You can picture it: an ancient pond, a frog sitting on the bank, and ? the frog jumping. You can see the splash, and the sound of the water. Basho says that everything has been said. This is all life is: an ancient pond, the frog jumping, the sound of water – silence. This is what you are; this is what everything is – silence.
Heraclitus talks in his river fragment in the same way. First he uses the sounds of a river – autoisi potamoisi. Before he says something, he uses the sounds of the river, and then gives the maxim: You cannot step in the same river twice. He is a poet, but no ordinary poet – a poet Hindus have always called a rishi. There are two types of poets. One who is still dreaming and creating poetry out of his dreams – a Byron, a Shelley, a Keats. Then there is another type of poet, a rishi, who is no longer dreaming – he looks at the reality and out of the reality, poetry is born. Heraclitus is a rishi, a poet who is no longer dreaming, who has encountered existence. He is the first existentialist in the West.
Now, try to penetrate his oracular maxims.
The hidden harmony
is better than the obvious.
Why? Why is the hidden harmony better than the obvious? – because the obvious is on the surface, and the surface can deceive and can be cultivated, conditioned. At the center you are existential, on the surface you are social. Marriage is on the surface, love is at the center. Love has a hidden harmony, marriage has an obvious harmony.
Just go to some friend’s house. If you look through the window you see the husband and wife fighting, their faces ugly. The moment you enter everything changes; they are so polite, they are talking to each other so lovingly. This is a harmony that is obvious, a harmony that is on the surface. But deep down there is no harmony, it is just a mannerism, it is just for display. A real man may appear inharmonious on the surface, but he will always be harmonious in the center. Even if he contradicts himself, in his contradictions there will be a hidden harmony. And a person who never contradicts himself, who is absolutely consistent on the surface, will not have the real harmony.
There are consistent people: if they love, they love; if they hate, they hate – they don’t allow opposites to mingle and meet. They are absolutely clear who their enemy is and who their friend is. They live on the surface and they create a consistency. Their consistency is not real; deep down inconsistencies are boiling, and on the surface they are somehow managing. You know them because you are them! On the surface you manage, but this won’t help. Don’t be bothered too much with the surface. Go deeper – and don’t try to choose between the opposites. You will have to live both. If you can live both, nonattached, unattached to either; if you can live both, love and remain a witness, hate and remain a witness ? that witnessing will be the hidden harmony. You will know that these are climates, changes in season, moods that just come and go – and you will see the gestalt in them.
This German word gestalt is beautiful. It says that there is a harmony between the figure and the background. They are not opposites, they appear as opposites. For example, in your first school you look at the blackboard, and the teacher writes with white chalk on the blackboard. Black and white are opposites. Yes, for Aristotelian minds they are opposites; black is black and white is white – they are the polarities. But why is this teacher writing with white on black? Can’t she write with white on white or black on black? She can, but it will be useless. The black has to be the background and the white becomes the figure on it; they contrast, there is a tension between them. They are opposites and there is a hidden harmony. The white looks whiter on black; that’s the harmony. On white it will simply disappear because there is no tension, no opposition.
Remember, Jesus would have disappeared if the Jews had not crucified him. They made it a gestalt; the cross was the blackboard and Jesus became whiter on it. Jesus would have completely disappeared; it is because of the cross that he has remained. It is because of the cross that he has penetrated people’s hearts more than a Buddha, more than a Mahavira. Almost half of the world has fallen in love with him – it is because of the cross. He was a white line on a black board. Buddha is a white line on a white board. The contrast is not there, the gestalt is not there; the background is just the same as the figure.
If you simply love and can’t hate, your love will not be worthwhile, it will simply be useless. It will have no intensity in it, it will not be a flame, it will not be a passion; it will be simply cold. It becomes a passion, and passion is a beautiful word because it has intensity. But how does it become a passion? – because the same man is capable of hate also. Compassion has an intensity if the same man is also capable of anger. If he is simply incapable of anger, his compassion will be impotent – just impotent. He is helpless, that’s why compassion is there. He cannot hate, that’s why he loves. When you love in spite of hate, there is passion. It becomes a figure and background phenomenon, there is a gestalt.
Heraclitus is talking of the deepest gestalt; the obvious harmony is really no harmony, the hidden harmony is the real harmony. So don’t try to be consistent on the surface; rather, find a consistency between the deep inconsistencies, find a harmony between the deepest opposites. The hidden harmony is better than the obvious. That is the difference between a religious man and a moral man. A moral man is just harmonious on the surface; a religious man is harmonious at the center. A religious man is bound to be contradictory; a moral man is always consistent. You can rely on a moral man; you cannot rely on a religious man. A moral man is predictable; a religious man, never. Nobody knew how Jesus would behave – even his close disciples were not aware, they couldn’t predict him, saying, “This man is unpredictable. He talks of love and then takes out a whip in the temple and chases the moneychangers out. He talks of compassion, he talks in terms of ‘love your enemy’ and upsets the whole temple – he is rebellious.” A man who talks of love seems to be inconsistent.
Bertrand Russell has written a book: Why I Am Not a Christian. In that book he raises all these inconsistencies. He says, “Jesus is inconsistent and looks neurotic. Somewhere he says ‘love your enemy’ and then he behaves in such an angry way; not only with people, but with trees – he curses a fig tree. Jesus and his disciples were hungry and came across a fig tree, but it wasn’t the season for figs. They looked at the tree and saw there were no fruits on it, and it is said that Jesus cursed the tree. What type of man is this? And he talks of love!”
He has a hidden harmony, but Bertrand Russell cannot find it because he is the modern Aristotle. He cannot find it, he cannot understand it. It is good that he is not a Christian – very, very good. He cannot be a Christian, he cannot be a religious man. He is a moralist; each act should be consistent – but with what, with whom? With whom should it be consistent? With your past? My assertion should be consistent with another – why? It is possible only if the river is not flowing.
Have you ever watched a river? Sometimes it is flowing left, sometimes right; sometimes to the south, sometimes north, and you will see that the river is very inconsistent – there is a hidden harmony; it reaches the ocean. Wherever it is going, the ocean is the goal. Sometimes it has to move southward because the gradient is to the south; sometimes it has to move just the opposite way, northward, because the gradient is to the north. It is finding the same goal in every direction ? it is moving toward the ocean. And you will see that it has reached.
Think of a river which is consistent and says that it will always move to the south because how can it move to the north? People will say that it is inconsistent. This river will never reach the ocean. The rivers of the Russells and Aristotles never reach the ocean; they are too consistent, too much on the surface. They don’t know the hidden harmony – that through opposites you can seek the same goal. The same goal can be sought through the opposites. That possibility is completely unknown to them. That possibility is there. The hidden harmony is better than the obvious. But it is difficult, you will be in constant difficulty. People expect consistency from you and the hidden harmony is not a part of society. It is part of the cosmos, but not of society. Society is a man-made affair, and has worked out the whole plan as if everything is static. Society has created moralities, codes, as if everything is unmoving. That’s why moralities continue for centuries. Everything changes and the dead rules continue. Everything goes on changing and the so-called moralists always go on preaching the same things which are absolutely irrelevant – but they are consistent with their past. Absolutely irrelevant things go on.
For example, in the times of Mohammed, in Arabian countries there were four times more women than men because the Arabians were warriors and continuously warring and killing each other; they were murderers. Women have never been so foolish, so their survival was four times greater; what to do now? In the whole of society, if there are four times more women than men, you can understand that it will be too difficult for any morality to exist there. Many problems will arise. So Mohammed made a rule that every Mohammedan could marry four women. They are still following the rule.
Now it has become an ugly thing, but they say that they are consistent with the Koran. Now the whole situation is different, absolutely different; there are not four times more women now – but they follow the rule. The thing that was a beautiful response in a particular historic situation is now ugly, absolutely ugly. But they will follow it because Mohammedans are very consistent people. They can’t change, and they cannot consult Mohammed again, as he is not there. Mohammedans are very, very cunning. They have closed the door for any prophet to come again; otherwise he might do something, make some changes. So this Mohammed is the last – the door is closed even if Mohammed himself wants to come. He cannot because they have closed the door. It always happens. Moralists always close the door because any new prophet will always create trouble; a new prophet cannot be consistent with old rules. He will live the moment. He will have his own discipline – consistent with the reality now, but what is the guarantee that it will be consistent with the past? There is no guarantee, it is not going to be so. So every moral tradition closes the door.
Jainas have closed their door. They say that Mahavira is the last, now no more tirthankaras. Mohammedans say that Mohammed is the last. Christians say that Jesus is the only begotten son of God, now no more – all doors closed. Why do moralists always close the doors? – just as a safety measure because if a prophet comes, a man who lives moment to moment, he will turn everything topsy-turvy; he will create a chaos. Somehow you get settled: a church, a morality, a code; everything fixed and you follow the rules. On the surface you attain an obvious harmony. Again a prophet comes and he recreates everything, disturbs everything; he starts creating everything anew again.
A moralist is a man on the surface. He lives for the rules, rules are not for him. He is for the scriptures, scriptures are not for him. He follows the rules, but he doesn’t follow awareness. If you follow awareness, witnessing, you will attain a hidden harmony. You are not bothered by the opposite, you can use it. Once you can use the opposite, you have a secret key; you can make your love more beautiful through hate.
Hate is not the enemy of love. It is the very salt that makes love beautiful – it is the background. You can make your compassion intense through anger, then it is not the opposite. This is Jesus’s meaning when he says, “Love your enemies.” This is the meaning: love your enemies because enemies are not enemies – they are friends, you can use them. In a hidden harmony they fall and become one.
Anger is the enemy – use it, make it a friend! Hate is the enemy – use it, make it a friend! Allow your love to grow deeper through it, make it a soil. It becomes a soil.
This is the hidden harmony of Heraclitus. Love the enemy, use the opposite. The opposite is not the opposite, it is just the background.
Opposition brings concord.
Out of discord
comes the fairest harmony.
Heraclitus is never surpassed.
Opposition brings concord.
Out of discord
comes the fairest harmony.

It is in changing
that things find repose.
People do not understand
how that which is at variance with itself,
agrees with itself.

There is a harmony in the bending back,
as in the case of the bow and lyre.

The name of the bow is life,
but its work is death.
Of course, to the rationalist he will seem to be speaking in riddles, obscure, dark. But is he? He is so crystal clear if you can see, he is so luminous. But if you are addicted to the rational mind it becomes difficult because, he says: “Out of disharmony the fairest harmony is born, opposition brings concord, love the enemy.”
Life will be absolutely saltless if the opposition is simply destroyed. Just think of a world where evil doesn’t exist. Do you think good will exist? Just think of a world where there is no sinner. Do you think everyone will be saints? The saint cannot exist without the sinner – the saint needs the sinner. The sinner cannot exist without the saint – the sinner needs the saint. There is a harmony, a hidden harmony; they are polarities. Life is beautiful because of both. God cannot exist without the Devil. God and the Devil are eternal.
People come to me and ask, “If God exists why is there so much misery, evil, bad – why?” It is because God cannot exist without them – that is the background. Alone without the Devil, God will be tasteless, just tasteless – you can vomit him up, but you cannot eat him; just tasteless, nauseous. He knows the hidden harmony; he cannot exist without the Devil, so don’t hate the Devil – use him. If God is using him, why can’t you? If God cannot exist without him, how can you? So real saints, saints who have an intensity, are just like Gurdjieff.
Alan Watts has written: “Gurdjieff is the holiest rascal I have ever known!” And it is so; he is a rascal, but the holiest. God himself is that rascal, the holiest. If you cut out the Devil, simultaneously you have killed God. The game needs two parties.
When Adam was tempted by the Devil, it was God himself who was tempting him. It is a conspiracy. The serpent is in the service of God, the Devil too. The very word devil is beautiful; it comes from a Sanskrit root which means the divine. Divine comes from the same root, dev, as devil; both words come from the same root. It is as if the root is one, only the branches are different; on one branch the devil, on another branch the divine – but the root is the same, dev. There must be a conspiracy, otherwise the game cannot continue. There must be a deep harmony – that is the conspiracy. Here God says to Adam, “You are not to eat from this tree of knowledge.” Now the conspiracy starts, the game starts; now the first rules are being set.
Christianity has missed many beautiful things because it has tried to create an obvious harmony, and for twenty centuries Christian theologians have been worried about how to explain the Devil. There is no need, it is simple, Heraclitus knows. It is very simple, no need to explain. But Christians have been worried because if there is the Devil, God must have created him; otherwise, how is he there?
If the Devil is there, God must be allowing him to be there; otherwise, how can he be there? If God cannot destroy him, your God becomes impotent; you cannot call him omnipotent. If God created the Devil without knowing that he was going to be the Devil, he is not omniscient, all-knowing. He created the Devil not knowing that this was going to disturb the whole world. He created Adam not knowing that he would eat the fruit of the tree. He prohibited it! – he is not omniscient, all-knowing. If there is the Devil, God cannot be omnipresent because who is present in the Devil? He cannot be everywhere; at least he is not there in the Devil’s heart. If he is in the Devil’s heart, why condemn the poor Devil?
There is a conspiracy – a hidden harmony. God prohibited Adam from eating just to tempt him. This is the first temptation because whenever you say, “Don’t do this,” temptation has entered. The Devil comes only later on – the first temptation is from God himself. Otherwise, there were millions of trees in the Garden of Eden so if Adam had been left to himself, it is almost impossible that he would have found the tree of knowledge – almost impossible, unbelievable!
Even up to now we have not been able to find all the trees on this earth. Many trees still remain unknown, uncategorized, and many species still have to be discovered. This earth is nothing – the Garden of Eden was God’s garden, with millions and millions of trees, infinite. If Adam and Eve had been left to themselves, alone, they would never have found it – but God tempted them. This I insist, that the temptation comes from God. The Devil is just the other partner in the game. He tempted by saying, “Don’t eat!” – immediately the tree was known, and the desire must have come. Why does God prohibit it? There must be something to it. It is not prohibited to God, he himself eats from it; it is prohibited just for us. The mind has started to function, the game starts. Just as a partner in the conspiracy, the Devil comes, the serpent, and says, “Eat it! – because if you eat it, you will be like gods.” And that is the deepest desire in the human mind, to be like gods.
The Devil did the trick because he knows the conspiracy. He didn’t approach Adam directly, he approached through Eve – because if you want to tempt man, you can tempt him only through woman; otherwise, there is no direct temptation. Every temptation comes through sex, every temptation comes through the woman. It is more important for the Devil to have the woman play the game because it is impossible to say no to a woman who loves you. You can say no to the Devil, but to the woman? And the Devil comes in the form of the serpent. It is just a phallic symbol, a symbol for the sex organ because there is nothing comparable to the serpent in representing the male sex organ; they are exactly alike. It comes through the woman because how can you say no to a woman?

Mulla Nasruddin had arranged for his wife to go to the mountains for her asthma. She was not willing to go, she refused and said, “I’m afraid that the mountain air is going to disagree with me.”
Mulla Nasruddin replied, “My dear, don’t worry. There is no mountain air so brave as to disagree with you! Don’t worry yourself.”

It is impossible to disagree with a woman you love, so women become easy conspirators with the Devil. The temptation entered, and Adam ate the apple from the tree, the fruit of knowledge – that’s why you are out of the Garden of Eden, and the game continues.
It is a deep hidden harmony. God cannot function alone. It would be just like electricity functioning with only a positive pole, no negative pole; he would be functioning only with man, no woman. No, he had tried it before – he failed. First, he made Adam, but he failed because with Adam alone the game was not happening, there was no go. Then he created woman, and the first woman he created was not Eve. The first woman was Lilith. She must have believed in the Women’s Liberation Movement. She created trouble because she said, “I am just as independent as you.” On the first day when they were going to sleep the trouble surfaced because they had only one bed. So who was going to sleep on the bed, and who would sleep on the floor? Lilith simply said, “No! You sleep on the floor.” This is how the liberation movement carries on. Adam didn’t listen and Lilith disappeared. Lilith went to God and said, “I am not going to play this game.”
In the West, this is how the woman is disappearing – Lilith is disappearing – the beauty, the grace and everything. The whole game is in trouble because there are women who say, “Don’t love a man.”
I was reading a pamphlet. These women say, “Kill men! Murder every man! – because if man lives, there can be no freedom for the woman.” If you kill man, can you still be here? The game needs both.
Lilith disappeared, and the game could not continue, so God had to create a woman. That’s why this time he added a bone from man himself because to create a separate woman would make trouble again. So he took a rib out of Adam and created a woman. Hence, there is a polarity and a unity still. They are two and still they belong to the same body. That is the meaning that they are two, opposites, but they still belong to the same body, the same root deep down; they are one body deep down. That’s why when they meet in a deep, loving embrace, they become one body. They come to that state where Adam was, alone; they meet and merge, become one.
There is opposition to the game, but still there is oneness deep within. These two things are needed for the game to continue: opposition, and still harmony. If there is absolute harmony the game will disappear – because with whom will you play? If there is complete discord, absolute opposition, no harmony, the game will disappear.
Harmony in discord, oneness in opposition, is the key to all mysteries.
It is in changing that things find repose. People do not understand how that which is at variance with itself, agrees with itself. The Devil agrees with God, God agrees with the Devil – that’s why the Devil exists.
There is a harmony in the bending back, as in the case of the bow and lyre. A musician plays with a bow and a lyre; the opposition is just on the surface. On the surface it is a clash, a struggle, a fight, a discord, but beautiful music comes out of it.
Opposition brings concord. Out of discord comes the fairest harmony…. The name of the bow is life, but its work is death. And death is its work, the ultimate result. Death and life are not two either.
The name of the bow is life, but its work is death. So death cannot really be the opposite – it must be the lyre. If the name of the bow is life, the name of the lyre must be death. Within these two the fairest harmony of life arises.
You are just in the middle between death and life – you are neither. So don’t cling to life and don’t be afraid of death. You are the music between the lyre and the bow. You are the clash, the meeting and the merging, the harmony, and the fairest that is born out of it.
Don’t choose! If you choose, you will be wrong. If you choose, you will become attached to one, identified with one. Don’t choose! Let life be the bow, let death be the lyre – and you be the harmony, the hidden harmony. The hidden harmony is better than the obvious.
Enough for today.

============================================================

Men are as forgetful and heedless
in their waking moments
of what is going on around them
as they are during their sleep.

Fools, although they hear,
are like the deaf;
to them the adage applies
that whenever they are present
they are absent.

One should not act or speak
as if he were asleep.

The waking have one world in common;
sleepers have each a private world of his own.

Whatever we see when awake is death,
when asleep, dreams.
Heraclitus touches the deepest problem of man: he is fast asleep even while awake. You sleep when you sleep, but you also sleep while you are awake. What is the meaning of it? – because this is what Buddha, Jesus, Heraclitus all say. You look wide awake, but that is only an appearance; deep within you the sleep continues. Even right now you are dreaming within; a thousand and one thoughts continue and you are not conscious of what is happening, you are not aware of what you are doing, you are not aware of who you are. You move as if asleep.
You must have known someone who sleepwalks; they get out of bed, do this and that, and go back to sleep again. There is a disease called somnambulism. Many people get out of their beds in the night with their eyes open, and move around! They can even find the door. They go to the kitchen, eat something, and return to bed. If you ask them in the morning, they don’t know anything about it. At the most, if they try to remember it, they think they have had a dream where they have woken up and gone to the kitchen. At the most it was a dream; even that is difficult to remember.
Many people have committed crimes while asleep. Many murderers when in court say that they don’t remember ever having done such a thing. It is not that they are deceiving the court – no. Now psychoanalysts have found that these people are not being deceitful, they are not being untrue; they are absolutely truthful. They did commit the murder – they committed it when they were fast asleep, as if in a dream. This sleep is deeper than ordinary sleep. This sleep is like being drunk; you can move a little, do a little, be a little aware also – but drunk. You don’t exactly know what is happening. Or what you have done in your past. Can you recollect exactly why you did what you did? What happened to you? Were you alert when it was happening? You fall in love not knowing why; you become angry not knowing why. You find excuses, of course; you rationalize whatever you do – but rationalization is not awareness.
Awareness means that whatever is happening in the moment is happening with complete consciousness; you are present there. If you are present when anger is happening, then it cannot happen. It can happen only when you are fast asleep. When you are present, immediately, transformation starts in your being because when you are present, aware, many things are simply not possible. If you are aware, everything that is called sin is not possible. In fact, there is only one sin and that is unawareness.
The original word sin means to miss. It doesn’t mean to commit something wrong; it simply means to miss, to be absent. The Hebrew root for the word sin means to miss. It exists in a few English words: misconduct, misbehavior. To miss means not to be there, doing something without being present – this is the only sin. And the only virtue: being fully alert while you are doing something – what Gurdjieff calls self-remembering, Buddha calls being rightly mindful, Krishnamurti calls awareness, Kabir calls surati. To be there! That’s all that is needed, nothing more. You need not change anything, and even if you try, you cannot.
You have been trying to change many things in you. Have you succeeded? How many times have you decided not to be angry again? What happened to your decision? ? when the moment comes you are in the same trap again; you become angry and after the anger, you repent again. It becomes a vicious circle; you are angry and you repent, then you are ready to do it again. Remember, even while you are repenting you are not there; that repentance is also part of sin. That’s why nothing happens. You go on trying and trying and you make many decisions and you make many vows, but nothing happens – you remain the same. You are exactly the same as when you were born, not even the slightest change has happened. Not that you haven’t tried, not that you haven’t tried enough – you have tried and tried and tried and you fail because it is not a question of effort. More effort won’t help. It is a question of being alert, not of effort.
If you are alert, many things simply drop; you needn’t drop them. This is my definition of sin: in awareness certain things are not possible, they are sins. In awareness only certain things are possible, they are virtues. There is no other definition, there is no other criterion. You cannot fall in love if you are aware, then falling in love is a sin. You can love, but it will not be like a fall, it will be like a rise.
Why do we use the term falling in love? ? it is a falling; you are falling, you are not rising. When you are aware, falling is not possible – not even in love. It is not possible, it is simply not possible. With awareness, it is impossible; you rise in love. Rising in love is a totally different phenomenon from falling in love. Falling in love is a dream state. That’s why you can see people who are in love from their eyes. It’s as if they are more asleep than others, intoxicated, dreaming. You can see it in their eyes because their eyes have a sleepiness. People who rise in love are totally different. You can see they are no longer in a dream, they are facing the reality and they are growing through it.
When you fall in love you remain a child; when you rise in love you mature. By and by love becomes not a relationship, it becomes a state of your being. It is not that you love this and you don’t love that, no – you are simply love. Whoever comes near you, you share with them. Whatever is happening, you give your love to it. You touch a rock and you touch it as if you are touching your beloved’s body. You look at the tree and you look as if you are looking at your beloved’s face. It becomes a state of being. Not that you are in love – now you are love. This is rising, this is not falling.
Love is beautiful when you rise through it, and love becomes dirty and ugly when you fall through it. Sooner or later you will find that it proves poisonous and becomes a bondage. You have been caught in it, your freedom has been crushed, your wings have been cut; now you are no longer free. Falling in love you become a possession; you possess and you allow somebody to possess you. You become a thing, and you try to convert the other person you have fallen in love with to become a thing.
Look at a husband and wife; they have both become like things, they are no longer people. Both are trying to possess each other. Only things can be possessed, never people. How can you possess a person? How can you dominate a person? How can you convert a person into a possession? Impossible! But the husband is trying to possess the wife; the wife is trying the same. There is a clash, both become basically enemies, and become destructive to each other.
It happened…

Mulla Nasruddin walked into the cemetery’s office and complained to the manager: “I know very well that my wife is buried here in your cemetery, but I can’t find her grave.”
The manager checked in his register and asked, “What is her name?”
Mulla replied, “Mistress Mulla Nasruddin.”
He looked again and said, “There is no Mistress Mulla Nasruddin, but there is a Mulla Nasruddin.” So he said, “We are sorry, it seems something has gone wrong with the register.”
Nasruddin said, “Nothing is wrong. Where is the grave of Mulla Nasruddin? – because everything is in my name.” Even the grave of his wife!

Possession ? everybody goes on trying to possess, the beloved, the lover. This is no longer love. In fact, when you possess a person, you hate, you destroy, you kill; you are a murderer. Love should give freedom; love is freedom. Love will make the beloved more and more free, will give wings, and open the vast sky. It cannot become a prison, an enclosure. You don’t know that love because that happens only when you are aware; that quality of love comes only when there is awareness. You know a love which is a sin because it comes out of sleep.
And this is so for everything you do. Even if you try to do something good, you harm. Look at the do-gooders; they always do harm, they are the most mischievous people in the world. Social reformers, so-called revolutionaries, are the most mischievous people. But it is difficult to see where their mischief lies because they are very good people, they are always doing good to others – that is their way of creating an imprisonment for the other. If you allow them to do something good to you, you will be possessed.
They start by massaging your feet, and sooner or later you will find their hands reach your neck; they start at the feet and end at the neck. They are unaware and don’t know what they are doing. They have learned a trick, that if you want to possess someone, do good. They are not even conscious that they have learned this trick. They will do harm because anything that tries to possess the other person, whatever its name or form, is irreligious, is a sin. Your churches, temples, mosques, have all committed sins toward you because they all became possessors, they all became dominators.
Every church is against religion because religion is freedom. Why does it happen? Jesus tries to give you freedom, give you wings. What happens, how does this church come in? ? it happens because Jesus lives on a totally different plane of being, the plane of awareness; those who listen to him, those who follow him, live on the plane of sleep. Whatever they hear, interpret, is interpreted through their own dreams – and whatever they create is going to be a sin. Christ gives you religion and people who are fast asleep convert it into a church.
It is said that once the devil Satan was sitting under a tree, very sad. A saint was passing by, he looked at Satan and said, “We have heard that you never rest, that you are always doing some mischief somewhere or other. What are you doing here sitting under the tree?” Satan was really depressed, and said, “It seems my work has been taken over by the priests, and I cannot do anything – I am completely unemployed. Sometimes I think of committing suicide because these priests are doing so well.” Priests have done so well because they converted freedom into imprisonment, they converted truth into dogmas. They converted everything from the plane of awareness to the plane of sleep. Try to understand exactly what this sleep is because if you can feel what it is, you have already started to become alert – you are already on the way out of it. What is this sleep? How does it happen? What is the mechanism? What is its modus operandi?
The mind is either in the past or in the future. This is the modus operandi. It is never in the present. It cannot be in the present, it is absolutely impossible for the mind to be in the present. When you are in the present, the mind is no longer there because the mind means thinking. How can you think in the present? You can think about the past; it has already become part of the memory, the mind can work it out. You can think about the future; it is not yet there, the mind can dream about it. The mind can do two things. Either it can move into the past; there is space enough to move, the vast space of the past – you can go on and on and on. Or the mind can move into the future; again a vast space, with no end to it – you can imagine and imagine and dream. But how can the mind function in the present? It has no space, the present has no space for the mind to make any movement.
The present is just a dividing line, that’s all. It has no space. It divides the past and the future; just a dividing line. You can be in the present, but you cannot think. For thinking, space is needed. Thoughts need space, they are just like things – remember it. Thoughts are subtle things, they are material; thoughts are not spiritual because the dimension of the spiritual starts only when there are no thoughts. Thoughts are material things, very subtle, and every material thing needs space. You cannot think in the present; the moment you start thinking it is already the past.
You look at the sun rising and say, “What a beautiful sunrise!” It is already the past. When the sun is rising there is not even space enough to say, “How beautiful!” because when you posit these two words “How beautiful!” the experience has already become the past, the mind already knows it in the memory. But exactly when the sun is rising, exactly when the sun is on the rise, how can you think? What can you think? You can be with the rising sun, but you cannot think. For you there is enough space, but not for thoughts.
A beautiful flower appears in the garden and you say, “What a beautiful rose.” Now, you are not with this rose at this moment; it is already a memory. When the flower is there and you are there, both present to each other, how can you think? What can you think? How is thinking possible? There is no space for it. The space is so narrow – in fact there is no space at all – that you and the flower cannot even exist as two because there is not enough space for two, only one can exist.
That’s why in a deep presence you are the flower and the flower has become you. You are also a thought – the flower is also a thought in the mind. When there is no thinking, who is the flower and who is the one who is observing? The observer becomes the observed. Suddenly boundaries are lost. Suddenly you have penetrated into the flower and the flower has penetrated into you. Suddenly you are not two – one exists.
If you start thinking, you have become two again. If you don’t think, where is the duality? When you exist with the flower, not thinking, it is a dialogue; not a duologue, but a dialogue. When you exist with your lover it is a dialogue, not a duologue because the two are not there. Sitting by the side of your lover, holding the hand of your beloved, you simply exist. You don’t think of the past days; you don’t think of reaching the future, coming to the future – you are here, now. It is so beautiful to be here and now, and so intense; no thought can penetrate this intensity. And the gate is narrow; narrow is the gate of the present. Not even two can enter it together, only one. In the present, thinking and dreaming are not possible because dreaming is nothing but thinking in pictures. Both are things, both are material.
When you are in the present without thinking, you are spiritual for the first time. A new dimension opens and that dimension is awareness. And because you have not known that dimension, Heraclitus will say that you are asleep, you are not aware. Awareness means to be in the moment so totally that there is no movement toward the past, no movement toward the future – all movement stops. That doesn’t mean that you become static. A new movement begins, a movement in depth.
There are two types of movement. That is the meaning of Jesus’ cross; it shows two movements, a crossroads. One movement is linear: you move in a line, from one thing to another, from one thought to another, from one dream to another; from A you move to B, from B you move to C, from C you move to D. This way you move – in a line, horizontal. This is the movement of time; this is the movement of one who is fast asleep. You can go like a shuttle, back and forth – the line is there. You can come from B to A, or you can go from A to B – the line is there. There is another movement which is in a totally different dimension. That movement is not horizontal, it is vertical. You don’t go from A to B, from B to C; you go from A to a deeper A, from A1 to A2, A3, A4, in depth – or in height.
When thinking stops, the new movement starts. Now you fall into depth, in an abyss-like phenomenon. People who are meditating deeply come to that point sooner or later; they become afraid because they feel as if an abyss has opened – a bottomless abyss, making you feel dizzy, and afraid. You would like to cling to the old movement because it was known, and this feels like death. That is the meaning of Jesus’ cross; it is a death. Going from the horizontal to the vertical is death – that is the real death. But it is death only from one side; on the other side it is resurrection. It is dying, to be born; it is dying from one dimension to be born in another. Horizontal you are Jesus, vertical you become Christ.
If you move from one thought to another you remain in the world of time. If you move in the moment, not in thought, you move into eternity; you are not static – nothing is static in this world, nothing can be static – but a new movement, a movement without motivation. Remember these words. On the horizon, on the horizontal line, you move because of motivation. You have to achieve something – money, prestige, power, or God, but you have to achieve something; a motivation is there. A motivated movement means sleep.
An unmotivated movement means awareness – you move because to move is sheer joy, you move because movement is life, you move because life is energy and energy is movement. You move because energy is delight – not for anything else. There is no goal in it, you are not after some achievement. In fact, you are not going anywhere, you are not going at all – you are simply delighting in the energy. There is no goal outside the movement; movement has its own intrinsic value ? no extrinsic value. A Buddha, a Heraclitus also lives. I am here living, breathing, but a different type of movement ? unmotivated.
A few days ago someone was asking me, “Why do you help people in meditation?” I replied, “This is my delight. There is no why to it – I simply enjoy.” Just as a person enjoys planting seeds in the garden, waiting for the flowers; when you flower I enjoy. It is gardening. When someone flowers it is a sheer delight. And I share; there is no goal in it. If you fail, I am not going to be frustrated. If you don’t flower, that too is okay because flowering cannot be forced. You cannot open a bud forcibly – you can, but then you kill it. It may look like a flowering, but it is not.
The whole world moves; existence moves into eternity, mind moves in time. Existence is moving into the depth and the height, and mind moves backward and forward. Mind moves horizontally ? that is sleep. If you can move vertically, that is awareness.
Be in the moment. Bring your total being in the moment. Don’t allow the past to interfere, and don’t allow the future to come in. The past is no longer there, it is dead. As Jesus says, “Let the dead bury their dead.” The past is no more! Why are you worried about it? Why do you go on chewing over it again and again? Are you mad? It is no longer there; it is just in your mind, it is just a memory. The future is not yet. What are you doing thinking about the future? How can you think about that which is not yet? What plans can you make about it? Whatever you do about it, it is not going to happen, and you will be frustrated because the whole has its own plan. Why do you try to have your own plans against it?
Existence has its own plans, it is wiser than you – the whole has to be wiser than the part. Why are you pretending to be the whole? The whole has its own destiny, its own fulfillment. Why bother about it? Whatever you do will be a sin because you will miss the moment, this moment. If it becomes a habit – as it becomes; if you miss, it becomes a habitual form, and when the future comes again you will miss it because it will not be a future, it will be a present. Yesterday you were thinking about today because then it was tomorrow; now it is today and you are thinking about tomorrow, and when tomorrow comes it will become today – because anything that exists here and now, cannot exist otherwise. If you have a fixed mode of functioning such that your mind always looks at tomorrow, when will you live? Tomorrow never comes. You will go on missing – and this is sin. This is the meaning of the Hebrew root: to sin. The moment the future enters, time enters. You have sinned against existence, you have missed. And this has become a fixed pattern ? like a robot you go on missing.
People come to me from all over the world. When they are at home they think about me and get very excited, they read and think and dream. When they come here they start thinking about their homes; the moment they reach here they are already going back! They start thinking about their children, their wives, their jobs, this and that and a thousand and one things. I see the whole foolishness of it. They will return home and again they will think of me. They miss, and this is sin.
While you are here with me, be here with me; be totally here with me so that you can learn a new mode of movement, so that you can move into eternity, not in time. Time is the world and eternity is God; the world is horizontal, God is vertical. Both meet at a point – that is where Jesus is crucified. Both meet at a point, the horizontal and the vertical – that point is here and now. From here and now you can go on two journeys: one in the world, in the future; the other into God, into depth. Become more and more aware, become more and more alert and sensitive to the present.
What will you do? How can it become possible? You are so fast asleep that you can make that a dream also. You can make that itself a thinking object, a thinking process. You can become so tense about it, and just because of it you cannot be in the present. If you think too much about how to be in the present, this won’t help. If you feel too much guilt… You will sometimes move into the past. It has been such a long routine. And sometimes you will start thinking about the future – immediately you will feel guilty that you have committed a sin again. Don’t become guilty; understand the sin, but don’t become guilty. And this is very, very delicate. If you feel guilty you have missed the whole thing. Now, in a new way, the old pattern starts. Now you feel guilty because you have missed the present. Now you are thinking about the past because that present is no longer present; it is past and you are feeling guilty about it – you are still missing.
So remember one thing, whenever you see that you have gone to the past or into the future, don’t create a problem out of it; simply come to the present, not creating any problem about it. It’s okay. Simply bring back your awareness. You will miss millions of times; it is not going to happen right now, immediately. It can happen, but it cannot happen because of you. It is such a long, long, fixed mode of behavior that you cannot change it right now. But don’t worry, God is not in a hurry; eternity can wait eternally.
Don’t become tense about it. Whenever you feel you have missed, come back, that’s all. Don’t feel guilty. That’s a trick of the mind ? now it is playing a game again. Don’t repent saying: “I forgot again.” Just when you think about it, come back to whatever you are doing: taking a bath, come back; eating your food, come back; going for a walk, come back. The moment you feel you are not here and now, come back – simply, innocently. Don’t create guilt. If you become guilty you miss the point.
There is sin and there is no guilt – but difficult for you. If you feel there is something wrong, you immediately become guilty. The mind is very, very cunning. If you feel guilty, the game has started now; on new ground, but the game is old. People come to me, and say, “We go on forgetting.” They are so sad when they say, “We go on forgetting. We do try, but remember only for a few seconds. We remain alert, self-remembering, and again it is lost. What can we do?” ? nothing can be done. It is not a question of doing at all. What can you do? ? the only thing that can be done is not to create guilt. Simply come back.
The more you come back ? simply, remember, not with a very serious face, not with much effort; simply, innocently, not creating a problem out of it because eternity has no problems. All problems exist on the horizontal plane. This problem will also exist on the horizontal plane. The vertical plane knows no problems, it is sheer delight; without any anxiety, anguish, worry, guilt ? nothing. Be simple and come back.
It is taken for granted that you will miss many times. Don’t worry about it; that is how it is. You will miss many times, but that is not the point. Don’t pay too much attention to the fact that you have missed many times, pay more attention to the fact that you have regained many times. Remember this, the emphasis should not be that you missed many times, it should be that you regained remembrance many times. Feel happy about it. Of course, your missing is as it should be. You are human, have lived on the horizontal plane for many, many lives, so it is natural. The beauty is that many times you came back. You have done the impossible; feel happy about it!
In twenty-four hours, twenty-four thousand times you will miss, but twenty-four thousand times you will regain. Now a new mode will start functioning. So many times you come back home, and by and by a new dimension is breaking in. You will be able to stay in awareness more and more, and you will go back and forth less and less. The span of going back and forth will be smaller and smaller. You will forget less and less, and remember more and more – you are entering the vertical. Suddenly one day, the horizontal disappears. An intensity comes to awareness and the horizontal disappears.
That is the meaning behind Shankara, Vedanta, and Hindus calling this world illusory ? because when awareness becomes perfect, this world, this world that you have created out of your mind, simply disappears. Another world becomes revealed to you. Maya disappears, the illusion disappears. The illusion is there because of your sleep, your unconsciousness. It is just like a dream. In the night you move in a dream and the dream is so true. Have you ever thought in a dream, “This is not possible”? The impossible happens in a dream, but you cannot doubt it. In a dream you have such faith, in a dream nobody is skeptical, not even a Bertrand Russell. No! In a dream everybody is like a child, trusting whatever happens. Your wife appears in a dream, and suddenly she becomes a horse. Not for a single moment do you say, “How can this be possible?”
Dream is trust, it is faith. You cannot doubt in a dream. Once you start doubting in a dream the rules are broken. Once you doubt, the dream starts disappearing. If even once you remember that it is a dream, suddenly a shock and the dream will shatter and you will be fully awake.
This world that you see around you is not the real world. Not that it doesn’t exist. It exists – but you are seeing it through a screen of sleep, an unconsciousness is in between. You look at it, you interpret it in your own way; you are just like a drunkard.
It happened…

Mulla Nasruddin was running. He was totally drunk and the elevator operator was just going to close the door, but he somehow pushed in. It was overcrowded. Everyone became aware that he was very drunk; his breath smelled. He tried to pretend; he tried to face toward the door, but he couldn’t see anything – his eyes were drunk and sleepy. He was trying to stand somehow, but that wasn’t possible either. He felt very embarrassed because everyone was looking at him and he could feel that they were thinking he was completely drunk.
Suddenly, he forgot where he was and said, “You must be wondering why I called this meeting.”

Seeing that so many people were around, he thought he had called a meeting and the people were wondering why. By the morning he will be okay. He will laugh as you are laughing.
All buddhas laugh when they awaken. Their laughter is like a lion’s roar. They laugh, not as you do, they laugh at the whole cosmic joke. They lived in a dream, in a sleep, intoxicated completely by desire, and they looked at existence through desire. It was not the real existence, they projected their own sleep on it.
You take the whole of existence as a screen, and you project your own mind on it and see things which are not there; you don’t see things which are there. The mind has explanations for everything. If you raise a doubt, the mind explains. It creates theories, philosophies, systems, just to feel comfortable and that nothing is wrong. All philosophies exist to make life convenient, so that everything looks okay and nothing is wrong – but while you are asleep everything is wrong.

A man came to see me. He was worried about his beautiful daughter. He was so worried and said, “Every morning she feels a little sick, and I have been to all the doctors and they say that nothing is wrong. So what can I do?”
I said to him, “Go to Mulla Nasruddin – he is the wise guy around here and he knows everything. I have never heard him say, ‘I don’t know.’ So go.”
He went, and I also followed just to see what Nasruddin would say. Nasruddin closed his eyes, contemplated on the problem, opened his eyes and said, “Do you give her milk before she goes to bed at night?”
The man replied, “Yes!”
Nasruddin said, “Now, I have found the problem. If you give a child milk, and the child turns over the whole night long from right to left, left to right, it creates churning and the milk becomes curd. Then the curd becomes cheese, the cheese becomes butter, the butter becomes fat, the fat becomes sugar, the sugar becomes alcohol – and, of course, in the morning she has a hangover.”

This is what all the philosophies are: an explanation of things; an explanation of things which cannot be explained, and pretending to know about something which is not known. But they make life convenient. You can sleep better, they are like tranquilizers. Remember, this is the difference between religion and philosophy. Philosophy is a tranquilizer, religion is a shock; philosophy helps you to sleep well, religion brings you out of sleep. Religion is not a philosophy – it is a technique to bring you out of your unconsciousness. All philosophies are techniques to help you sleep well; they give you dreams, utopias.
Religion takes all dreams from you, all utopias. Religion brings you to the truth, and the truth is possible only when you are not dreaming. A dreaming mind cannot see the true. A dreaming mind will convert the truth also into a dream. For example, you set your alarm; you want to get up at four o’clock in the morning because you have to catch a train. Have you ever noticed in the morning when the alarm goes off, your mind creates a dream where you are sitting in a temple and the bells are ringing – everything is explained. The alarm is no longer a problem, it cannot wake you. You have explained it away – immediately! Mind is subtle.
Psychoanalysts are very worried as to how it happens ? how the mind creates it immediately, so immediately. It is so difficult. The mind must project it beforehand. How, suddenly, you find yourself in a church or temple where the bells are ringing? The alarm goes off and immediately you have an explanation within the dream. You are trying to avoid the alarm; you don’t want to get up on such a cold winter’s morning. The mind says, “This is not the alarm, this is a temple you are visiting.” With everything explained, you fall asleep again.
This is what philosophies have been doing, and that’s why there are so many philosophies – because everyone needs a different explanation. The explanation that helps someone else to go to sleep will not help you. And this is what Heraclitus says in this passage.
Now try to understand him. He says:
Men are as forgetful and heedless
in their waking moments
of what is going on around them
as they are during their sleep.
You are not aware of what goes on around you in your sleep, but are you aware of what goes on around you in your waking hours? Much research has been done. Your mind never allows ninety-eight percent of messages coming to you to enter – ninety-eight percent. Only two percent is allowed to enter, and that two percent the mind also interprets. I say something, you hear something else. I say something else, you interpret it in such a way that it doesn’t disturb your sleep. Your mind immediately gives you an interpretation. You find a place in your mind for it and the mind absorbs it; it becomes part of the mind. That’s why you go on missing Buddhas, Christs, Heraclituses, and others. They go on talking to you; they go on saying they have found something, they have experienced something, but when they say it to you, you immediately interpret it. You have your own tricks.
Aristotle was very disturbed by Heraclitus. He convinced himself that “This man must have some defect in his character – finished!” You have categorized him because he doesn’t suit you, he disturbs you. Heraclitus must have been very heavy on Aristotle’s mind – because Aristotle moves on the horizontal, he is the master of that, and this man is trying to push you into the abyss. Aristotle moves on the plain ground of logic and this man is trying to push you into the mystery. Some explanation is needed. Aristotle says, “This man has some, biological, physiological, characterological defect. Some defect is there, otherwise, why should he insist on paradox? Why should he insist on mystery? Why should he insist that there exists a harmony between the opposites? Opposites are opposites. There is no harmony. Life is life and death is death. Be clear about it, don’t mix things – this man seems to be a muddler.”
Lao Tzu also felt the same and said, “Everyone seems to be wise except me. Everyone seems to be very clever except me – I am a fool!” Lao Tzu is one of the greatest, one of the wisest persons ever born, but he feels that amidst you he is a fool. He says, “Everyone seems to be so clear a thinker, I am muddle-headed.” What Aristotle says to Heraclitus, Lao Tzu says about himself.
Lao Tzu says, “When someone listens to my teaching without the mind, he becomes enlightened. If somebody listens to my teaching through the mind, he finds his own explanations – which have nothing to do with me. When someone listens, not listening at all – there are people who listen without listening – when somebody listens as if he is listening without listening, he laughs at my foolishness.” And the third type of mind is the majority. Lao Tzu says, “If the majority doesn’t laugh at you, you must be aware that you must be saying something wrong. If the majority laughs, only then are you saying something true. When the majority thinks you are a fool, only then is there some possibility of your being a wise man; otherwise, there is no possibility.”
Heraclitus looks muddle-headed to Aristotle. It will look like that to you too because Aristotle has captured the minds of all the universities and colleges of the whole world. Now everywhere you are taught logic, not mystery. Everywhere you are taught to be rational, not mystic. Everybody is being trained to be clear-cut. If you want to be clear-cut you have to move on the horizontal; there, A is A, B is B, and A is never B. But in the mysterious abyss of the vertical, boundaries meet and merge into each other: man is woman, woman is man; right is wrong, wrong is right; dark is light, light is dark; life is death, death is life. All boundaries meet and merge. Hence, God is a mystery, not a syllogism. Those who give proof for God are simply doing the impossible; no proof can be given for God. Proof exists on the horizontal.
That is the meaning of trust; you fall into the abyss, you experience the abyss, and simply disappear in it ? and you know. You know only when the mind is not, never before.
Fools, although they hear,
are like the deaf;
to them the adage applies
that whenever they are present
they are absent.
Wherever you are present, that is exactly the place where you are absent. You may be somewhere else, but not there where you are. Wherever you are, there you are not.
It is said in old Tibetan scriptures, “God comes to you many times, but he never finds you there where you are. He knocks at your door, but the host is not there – he is always somewhere else.” Are you in your house, at your home, or somewhere else? How can God find you? There is no need to go to him, just be at home and he will find you. He is in search of you just as you are in search of him. Just be at home so when he comes he can find you. He comes, he knocks millions of times, waits at the door, but you are never there.
Heraclitus says: Fools, although they hear, are like the deaf; to them the adage applies that whenever they are present they are absent. This is the sleep, being absent, not being present to the present moment, being somewhere else.
It happened…

Mulla Nasruddin was sitting in the coffeehouse talking about his generosity. And while he was talking he was going to extremes as everybody does because he always forgets what he is saying. Someone asked, “Nasruddin, if you are so generous why don’t you ever invite us to your home? You’ve never invited us for a single meal. So what about it?”
He was so excited he completely forgot about his wife. So he said, “Come on then, right now!” The nearer he reached home, the more sober he became. He remembered his wife and became afraid – thirty people were coming. Just outside the house he said, “Wait! You all know that I have a wife. You also have wives so you know. Just wait. First let me go and persuade her, then I will call you in.” So he went and disappeared.
They waited and waited and waited, and he didn’t come, so they knocked. Nasruddin had told his wife exactly what had happened, that he was talking too much about generosity and he had been caught.
His wife said, “But we don’t have enough for thirty people, and nothing is possible at this late hour of the night.”
Nasruddin said, “Do one thing, when they knock again simply tell them that Nasruddin is not at home.”
So when they knocked the wife went to the door and said, “Nasruddin is not at home.”
They replied, “This is surprising because we came with him, and he went in and we have not seen him go out, and we are waiting on the step, thirty of us – he must be in. Go in and find him. He must be hiding somewhere.”
His wife went in, and said, “What to do now?”
Nasruddin became excited. He said, “Wait!” He went out and said, “What do you mean? He could have gone out by the back door!”

This is possible, every day this is happening to you. He forgot himself completely; that’s what happened – in the logic he forgot himself. The logic is right, the argument is right, but what do you mean: “You are waiting at the front door; he could have gone by the back door”? The logic is right, but Nasruddin has completely forgotten that he himself is saying it.
You are not present. You are neither in the present to the world, nor to yourself. This is the sleep. Then how can you hear, how can you see, how can you feel? If you are not present here and now, all doors are closed. You are a dead person, you are not alive. That’s why Jesus again and again says to his listeners: “If you have ears, hear me; if you have eyes, see me!”
Heraclitus must have found many people who listen, but don’t hear; who see, but can’t see because their homes are completely empty. The master is not at home; the eyes are looking, the ears are hearing, but the master is not present inside. Eyes are just windows; they can’t see unless you see through them. How can a window see? You have to stand at the window, only then can you see. How? It is just a window, it cannot feel. If you are there, it becomes totally different.
The whole body is like a house and the mind is traveling, the master is always traveling somewhere else and the house remains empty. Life knocks at your door – you may call it God, or whatever you like, the name doesn’t matter. Call it existence – it knocks at the door, it is already continuously knocking, but you are never found there. This is the sleep.
One should not act or speak
as if he were asleep.
Act, speak, with full awareness and you will find a tremendous change in you. The very fact that you are aware changes your acts. You cannot commit sin. Not that you have to control yourself, no! Control is a poor substitute for awareness, a very poor substitute; it doesn’t help much. If you are aware, you need not control anger; in awareness anger never arises. They cannot exist together; there is no coexistence for them. In awareness jealousy never arises. In awareness many things simply disappear, all the things which are negative.
It is just like a light; when light is in your house, how can darkness exist there? It simply escapes. When your house is lit, how can you stumble? How can you knock into the wall? The light is there, you know the door; you simply reach the door, you go out or you go in. When there is darkness you stumble, you grope, you fall. When you are unaware you grope, you stumble, you fall. Anger is nothing but stumbling; jealousy is nothing but groping in dark. All that is wrong is wrong, not because of itself, but because you are living in darkness.
If a Jesus wants to be angry, he can be; he can use it. You cannot use it – you are being used by it. If Jesus feels that it will be good and helpful, he can use anything – he is a master. Jesus can be angry without being angry. Many people worked with Gurdjieff and said that he was a terrible man. When he was angry he would be terribly angry, he would look like a murderer, but that was just a game, just a situation to help somebody. Immediately, without even a single moment’s gap, he would look at another person and would smile. He would look again at the same person whom he had been angry with, and he would be angry and terrible looking.
It is possible. When you are aware you can use everything. Even poison becomes elixir when you are aware, and when you are asleep even elixir becomes poison – because the whole thing depends on your being alert or not. Acts don’t mean anything. Acts do not matter. You, your awareness, your being conscious, mindful, is what matters. What you do is not the concern.
It happened…

A thief came to a great Buddhist master, Nagarjuna. The thief had fallen in love with the master because he had never seen such a beautiful person, such infinite grace.
He asked Nagarjuna, “Is there also some possibility for my growth? But one thing I must make clear to you. I am a thief. And another thing: I cannot leave it, so please don’t make it a condition. I will do whatever you say, but I cannot stop being a thief. I have tried many times – it never works, so I have stopped making the effort. I have accepted my destiny, that I am going to be a thief and remain a thief, so don’t talk about it. Let it be clear from the very beginning.”
Nagarjuna said, “Why are you afraid? Who is going to talk about you being a thief?”
The thief replied, “Whenever I go to a monk, to a religious priest or to a saint, they always say, ‘First stop stealing.’”
Nagarjuna laughed and said, “You must have gone to thieves; otherwise, why? Why should they be concerned? I am not concerned!”
The thief was very happy and said, “Then it is okay. It seems that now I can become a disciple. You are the right master.”
Nagarjuna accepted him and said, “Now you can go and do whatever you like. You only have to follow one condition: be aware! Go and break into houses; enter, steal, bring things. Do whatever you like, it is of no concern to me, I am not a thief – but do it with full awareness.”
The thief couldn’t understand that he was falling into a trap. He said, “Everything is okay. I will try.”
After three weeks he came and said, “You are tricky because if I become aware, I cannot steal. If I steal, awareness disappears. I am in a fix.”
Nagarjuna said, “No more talk about your being a thief and stealing. I am not concerned, I am not a thief. Now you decide! If you want awareness, you decide. If you don’t want it, you decide.”
The man said, “But now it is difficult. I have tasted it a little, and it is so beautiful – I will leave anything, whatever you say.” The thief continued, “The other night I entered the king’s palace for the first time. I opened the treasure. I could have become the richest man in the world – but you were following me and I had to be aware. Suddenly, when I became aware, there was no motivation, no desire. When I became aware, diamonds looked just like stones, ordinary stones. When I lost awareness the treasure was there. I waited and did this many times. I would become aware and I became like a buddha, and I could not even touch it because the whole thing looked foolish, stupid – just stones, what am I doing? Losing myself just for stones? But then I would lose awareness; they would become beautiful again, the whole illusion. But finally I decided that they were not worth it.”

Once you have known awareness, nothing is worth it – you have known the greatest bliss of life. Suddenly, many things simply drop; they become stupid, become foolish. The motivation is not there, the desire is not there, the dreams have fallen. One should not act or speak as if he were asleep. This is the only key.
The waking have one world in common;
sleepers have each a private world of his own.
Dreams are private, absolutely private! No one can enter your dream. You cannot share a dream with your beloved. Husbands and wives sleep in one bed, but dream separately. It is impossible to share a dream because it is nothing – how can you share a nothing? Just like a bubble, it is absolutely nonexistential; you cannot share it, you have to dream alone. That’s why, because of so many sleepers, there exists so many worlds. You have your own world; if you are asleep you live enclosed in your own thoughts, concepts, dreams, desires. Whenever you meet another, two worlds clash; worlds in collision – this is what the situation is. Watch!
Look at a husband and wife talking; they are not talking at all. The husband is thinking about the office, the salary; the wife is thinking about her dresses for Christmas. Inside they have their own private worlds, but their private worlds meet somewhere – clash rather – because the wife’s dresses will depend on the husband’s salary and the husband’s salary has to provide for the wife’s dresses.
The wife says, “Darling,” but behind the word darling are dresses; she is thinking about them. The darling doesn’t mean that which is written in the dictionary because every time a woman says, “Darling” this is just a facade and the husband immediately becomes afraid. Of course, he does not show it because when someone says, “Darling” you cannot show it. He says, “What is it, dear? How are you?” But he is afraid because he is thinking about his salary, and he knows Christmas is coming and there is danger.

Mulla Nasruddin’s wife was saying to him, “What has happened? Lately, even when I cry and weep, and tears roll down my face, you don’t even ask, ‘Why are you weeping?’”
Nasruddin replied, “Enough is enough! – it costs too much to ask. I have committed that mistake so many times in the past because those tears are not just tears – they are dresses, a new house, new furniture, a new car; many things are hidden behind those tears. Those tears are just a start.”

No dialogue is possible because there are two private worlds inside. Only conflict is possible.
Dreams are private, truth is not private. Truth cannot be private – truth cannot be mine or yours, cannot be Christian or Hindu, Indian or Greek. Truth cannot be private. Dreams are private. Remember, whatever is private must belong to the world of dreams. Truth is an open sky, it is for all, it is one.
That’s why when Lao Tzu speaks, the language may be different; when Buddha speaks, the language is different; when Heraclitus speaks, the language is different – but they mean the same, they indicate toward the same. They don’t live in a private world. The private world has disappeared with their dreams, desires – with the mind. The mind has a private world, but consciousness has no private worlds. The waking have one world in common, and all those who are waking have one world in common – that is existence. And all those who are asleep and dreaming have their own worlds.
Your world has to be dropped; that is the only renunciation I require of you. I don’t say, “Leave your wife.” I don’t say, “Leave your job.” I don’t say, “Leave your money,” “Leave your anything,” no! I simply say, “Leave your private worlds of dreams.” That is sannyas for me. The old sannyas was leaving this world, the visible. One goes to the Himalayas, leaves the wife and children; that is not the point at all. That is not the world to leave. How can you leave it? Even the Himalayas belong to this world. The real world that has to be renounced is the mind, the private dreaming world. If you renounce it, sitting in the market, you are in the Himalayas. If you don’t renounce it, in the Himalayas you will also create a private world around you.
How can you escape yourself? Wherever you go you will be with yourself. Wherever you go you will behave in the same way. Situations may be different, but how can you be different? You will be asleep in the Himalayas. What difference does it make whether you sleep in Pune, Boston, London or in the Himalayas? Wherever you are you will be dreaming. Drop dreaming! Become more alert. Suddenly dreams disappear, and with dreams all miseries disappear.
Whatever we see when awake is death,
when asleep, dreams.
This is really beautiful. Whenever you are asleep you see dreams, illusions, mirages; your own creation, your own private world. When you are awake what do you see?
Heraclitus says, “When you are awake you see death all around.” Maybe that’s why you don’t want to see. Maybe that’s why you dream and create a cloud of dreams around you, so that you are not required to face the fact of death. But remember, a man becomes religious only when he encounters death, never before. When you encounter death, and see it face to face; when you don’t avoid, dodge, escape, and don’t create a cloud around you; when you face and encounter the fact of death, suddenly you become aware that death is life. The deeper you move into death, the deeper you move in life. Heraclitus says, “Opposites meet and mingle, they are one.”
Remember, if you are trying to escape from death, you will also be escaping from life; that’s why you look so dead. This is the paradox: escape death and you remain dead; face, encounter death and you become alive. The moment you face death so deeply, so intensely, that you start feeling that you are dying – not only around, but within also, you feel and touch death – the crisis comes. That is the cross of Jesus, the crisis of dying. At that moment, from one world you die – the world of the horizontal, the world of the mind – and you resurrect in another world.
Jesus’ resurrection is not a physical phenomenon. Christians have been unnecessarily creating so many hypotheses around it. It is not a resurrection of this body, it is a resurrection in another dimension of this body. It is a resurrection in another dimension of another body that never dies. This body is temporal, eternal. Jesus resurrects in another world, the world of the truth; the private world has disappeared.
In the last moment Jesus says that he is worried, troubled. Even a man like Jesus is worried dying, it has to be so. He cries to God, “What are you doing to me?” He would like to cling to the horizontal, he would like to cling to life – even a man like Jesus.
So don’t feel guilty about yourself; you would also like to cling. This is the human in Jesus, and he is more human than Buddha, Mahavira. This is the human. The man comes to face death and he is troubled, and he cries, but he doesn’t go back, he doesn’t fall. He immediately becomes aware of what he is asking. He says, “Thy will be done!” He relaxes, surrenders. The wheel turns immediately – he is no longer in the horizontal; he has entered the vertical, the depth. There he is resurrected into eternity.
Die to time so that you are resurrected into eternity. Die to the mind so that you become alive in consciousness. Die to thinking so that you are born into awareness.
Heraclitus says: Whatever we see when awake is death… That’s why we live in dreams, sleep, tranquilizers, narcotics, intoxicants – in order not to face the fact. But the fact has to be faced. If you face it, the fact becomes the truth; if you escape, you live in lies. If you face the fact, it becomes the door for the truth. The fact is death; that has to be faced. The truth will be life, eternal life, life in abundance, life which never ends. Death is not death. Life and death are both one, like two wings – this is the hidden harmony.
Enough for today.

============================================================

It pertains to all men
to know themselves
and to be temperate.

To be temperate is the greatest virtue.

Wisdom consists in speaking and acting the truth,
giving heed to the nature of things.

Listening to me but not to the Logos,
it is wise to acknowledge
that all things are one.

Wisdom is one –
to know the intelligence by which
all things are steered through all things.

Wisdom is one and unique;
it is unwilling and yet willing
to be called by the name of Zeus.
A few things before we enter these sutras of Heraclitus. First: to know oneself is the most difficult thing. It should not be so; it should be just the opposite, the simplest thing. But for many reasons it is not. It has become so complicated and you have invested so much in self-ignorance that it seems almost impossible to turn back, to return to the source, to encounter oneself.
Your whole life, as approved by society, state, church, is based on self-ignorance. You live without knowing yourself because society doesn’t want you to know yourself. It is dangerous for society. A man who knows himself is bound to be rebellious.
Knowledge is the greatest rebellion – I mean self-knowledge, not knowledge gathered through scriptures. Not the knowledge found in the universities, but knowledge that happens when you encounter your own being; when you come to yourself in your total nudity, naked; when you see yourself as God sees you, not as society would like to see you; when you see your natural being in its total wild bloom – not a civilized phenomenon, conditioned, cultured, polished.
Society is concerned with making a robot out of you because it is helpful ? not a revolutionary. It is easy to dominate a robot; it is almost impossible to dominate a man of self-knowledge. How can you dominate a Jesus? How can you dominate a Buddha or a Heraclitus? He will not yield, he will not follow dictates. He will move through his own being. He will be like the wind, like the clouds; he will move like the rivers. He will be wild – of course beautiful, natural, but dangerous to the false society. He will not fit. Unless we create a natural society in the world, a Buddha is always going to remain a misfit, a Jesus is bound to be crucified.
Society wants to dominate; the privileged classes want to dominate, to oppress, to exploit. They would like you to remain completely unaware of yourself. This is the first difficulty. And one has to be born in a society. Parents, teachers, priests are all part of society. Society is everywhere, all around you. How to escape? It seems really impossible. How to find a door back to nature? You are enclosed from every side.
The second difficulty comes from your own self because you would also like to oppress, to dominate; you would also like to possess, to be powerful. A man of self-knowledge cannot be made a slave, and he cannot make a slave of anyone else either. You cannot oppress a man of knowledge, and a man of knowledge cannot oppress anyone. He cannot be dominated and he will not dominate. Domination simply disappears from that dimension. You cannot possess him and he will not possess anyone. He will be free and will help others to be free. This is an even deeper difficulty than the first. You can avoid society, but how to avoid your own ego? You are afraid. A man of knowledge simply doesn’t think in terms of possession, domination, power. He is innocent like a child. He would like to live totally free, and he would also like others to live totally free.
This man will be a freedom here in your world of slavery. Wouldn’t you not like to be exploited? You will say, “Yes,” you wouldn’t like to be exploited. Wouldn’t you not like to be made a prisoner? You will say “Yes,” you wouldn’t like to be made a prisoner. But would you like the other thing: not to make a prisoner of anyone else, not to dominate, not to oppress and exploit? Not to kill the spirit, or make a person a thing? That is difficult. And remember, if you want to dominate, you will be dominated. If you want to exploit, you will be exploited. If you want someone else to be a slave for you, you will be enslaved. They are both aspects of the same coin. This is the difficulty in self-knowledge; otherwise, self-knowledge should be the simplest thing, the easiest. There shouldn’t be any need to make any effort.
Effort is needed for these two things; they are the barriers. Just watch and see these two barriers, and start by dropping your own. First stop dominating, possessing, exploiting, and suddenly you will become capable of getting out of the trap of society.
The ego is the problem; that’s why you cannot know yourself. The ego gives you certain false images of yourself, and if you carry those images for a long time, you become afraid. The fear is that if your image falls, your identity will be broken. You create a false face and become afraid; if this false face falls, who will you be? You will go mad. You have invested too much in it. Everyone thinks about himself in such lofty terms, in such false terms; nobody agrees with him, nobody approves, but then your ego thinks that everyone is wrong.
I used to know a very old man. He lived almost half a century in the same house in a country town. He never went outside the town, in fact, never went inside the town either. He always remained in the house, a very isolated, introverted type of man. He never married, and remained a permanent bachelor with parents dead, no children, no friends – alone. People thought he was a little eccentric, a little crazy. No one ever came to see him and he never went to see anyone. Suddenly he surprised the whole town and neighborhood; he was moving into the house next door. The neighbors gathered together and asked, “Why?” For half a century he had lived in the same house, why now so suddenly a change?
The man said, “Boys, it seems that it is the gypsy in me.”
That is his image. Whether you agree or not, that is not the point, but he thinks he is a gypsy. This is how you are all carrying your own images.
The first problem arises: if you want to know yourself you have to drop your false images, you have to see yourself as you are – and that is not very beautiful, that is the trouble. That is not very beautiful, that’s why you have created beautiful images – to hide. If you see yourself in total nakedness it is not going to be a very beautiful scene. You will see anger, jealousy, hatred, and millions of wrong things all around you. You think of yourself as a great lover – and there is jealousy, possessiveness, hatred, anger and all sorts of negativities. You think of yourself as a very, very beautiful person – but when you enter into yourself, you encounter ugliness. You turn your back immediately.
That’s why for thousands of years buddhas have always been teaching: “Know thyself,” but nobody listens to them. To know oneself seems to be such a difficult thing. Why? – because you have to encounter ugly phenomena. They are there, one has to pass through them. You have a beautiful being within you, but that beautiful being is not on the periphery, it is at the center. To reach the center you have to pass through the periphery. You cannot escape, there is no way to escape, one has to pass through it. You have to pass through all the ugliness, all the negativity, hatred, jealousy, violence, aggression, and if you are ready and mature enough to pass through the periphery, only then will you reach the center, and the scene changes.
At the center you are God.
At the periphery you are the world – and the world is ugly. At the periphery you are nothing but a miniature society, and the society is ugly. At the periphery you are a Napoleon, a Hitler, a Genghis Khan, a Tamerlane, all the politicians, all the mad people of the world. At the periphery you are a miniature of all that; you are the whole history of aggression, violence, oppression, slavery. Remember, at the periphery you are the history that belongs to this world. Everything is involved; it has to be so because the mind is not your own, it is a social product. The mind carries all the germs, diseases, and ugliness of the past because the mind belongs to the collective. There are certain moments when you can see and watch your own Genghis Khan, your own Hitler. There are certain moments when you can see that you would like to murder, kill and destroy the whole world.
You have to be very courageous to pass through the periphery, to be a witness. If you can enter this periphery, this society, the history, at the center you are God himself. There is infinite beauty – but that infinite beauty is untouched by society, it is not the periphery. You are innocent like a newborn baby, fresh as the dewdrop in the morning, uncontaminated. But to reach that, you have to pass through all the ugliness. The whole history of man has to be crossed. You simply cannot avoid it.
That’s what you have been doing, and that’s why self-knowledge has become difficult – you want to avoid it. The only way to avoid it is to close your eyes, not to see, and create a private dream against it. Look at yourself as you would like yourself to be – all ideals, utopias, beautiful images. Make a small niche near the periphery – beautiful, decorated – and don’t look at it, just keep your back to it.
Heraclitus says “Know thyself!” because that is the only wisdom. You become afraid to come out of your decorated part because just near it is the volcano – it will erupt any moment. So people talk about self-knowledge, they discuss, write, create systems about it, but they never try it. Even those who continuously talk about knowing the self, just talk about it, argue it, discuss it, but in actual fact never try it. Self-knowledge is an existential experience, it is not theory. Theories won’t help. Theories will be just part of your decoration. They will not break the ice. They will not break the periphery. They will not lead you to the center.
You listen to what people say; if they say that you are God, you feel very happy; if they say that you are an eternal soul, you feel very, very happy. You also paint, decorate these theories. They are the same trick, escapes – they will not help. If you go around India, everyone knows that everyone is part of God, that everyone is brahman – and look at their lives and the ugliness of it! Look at the lives of the people who talk about God and you won’t find even a particle, not even an atomic part of what they are saying. They are saying it not to convince you, they are saying it to convince themselves. But they remain on the periphery and they are afraid to move.
The fear is there and it has to be dropped. Remember, before you attain ultimate bliss you will have to pass through long suffering. Before you attain the infinite, the eternal, you will have to pass through the temporal, the whole history of man. It is inbuilt, it is in every cell of your body, every cell of your mind and brain – you cannot avoid it. The whole past is there with you, it is in you, and has to be passed through. It is a nightmare, it is a very, very long nightmare, millions of years, but one has to pass through it – that is the difficulty.
Suffering has to be suffered; that is the meaning of Jesus on the cross. Through suffering he attains the resurrection; through suffering you will attain self-knowledge. So don’t try to avoid it – there is no way to avoid it. The more you avoid it, the more you are losing opportunities. Face it! There is nothing that can be done except to face it. The more you face it, the more it disappears. A moment comes when you are absolutely ready to face it, whatsoever it is – you drop all the images. Even in a single moment of intense alertness, you can reach the center. But in that single moment you will have to suffer the whole past of humanity, the whole history; you will have to suffer all that has happened.
You must have heard: it is said that if people drown in the sea or in a river, in a single fragment of a moment they remember their whole past from the very birth, the pangs of birth – in a single moment, a flash, and the whole life passes. This is true. And the same happens when you reach the moment of samadhi, the ultimate death, when the ego dies completely. This happens! But in a single moment you suffer the whole past of humanity, not your own. This is the cross. You suffer the whole past of humanity because now you are transcending humanity. You have to pass through all that humanity has lived. You will have to suffer it. It is tremendous – the anguish is absolute. Only then do you reach the center and bliss becomes possible.
Self-knowledge is difficult because you are not ready to pass through any suffering. You think of self-knowledge in terms of tranquilizers; you think self-knowledge is a tranquilizer. People come to me and say, “Give us peace, silence.” If somebody promises to give you silence and peace without suffering, he is befooling you – and you will be caught in the trap very easily because that’s what you would like to have. That is the appeal of Maharishi Mahesh Yogi-type-people in the West. In fact, they are not giving you meditation, they are giving you tranquilizers. A meditation is bound to pass through suffering; it is not a play. You have to move through fire, and only in that fire will your ego drop. Looking at the whole ugliness of it, it drops automatically.
Maharishi Mahesh Yogi and others say that there is no need to suffer. They say, “I will give you a technique – just do it for ten minutes in the morning and evening and it will tranquilize your being. You will feel infinite peace and everything will be okay, and in just a few days you will become enlightened.”
It is not so easy – it is arduous. Tricks won’t help. Don’t waste your time on tricks. How can you become enlightened by just chanting a mantra for ten minutes? You have passed through history and you have come to a point, here, to this moment; you have passed through millions of years – who will pass back? Meditation means returning to the source. You have come up to this point in time; you will have to go back, you will have to regress, you will have to reach the original point from where the journey started. And you think, just by chanting a mantra for ten minutes in the morning, you will attain it?
Who do you think you are befooling? You are befooling yourself. It is not by chanting mantras that you have reached up to now. Humanity has lived, lived in millions of wrong ways – wandered, missed, committed sin, murdered; war, exploitation, oppression, domination. You have been a part of it, you are responsible for it. Just by chanting a mantra for ten minutes you think all responsibility is gone, and you have transcended? You call this chanting transcendental meditation? Who do you think you are befooling?
Transcendence is possible, but not through such easy tricks. Transcendence is possible only through the cross. Transcendence is possible only through suffering. If you are ready you can suffer the whole past in a single moment – but it is going to be an intense nightmare. That’s why a master is needed – because you can go completely mad. It is moving through dangerous terrain. Self-knowledge is the greatest thing, and self-knowledge is also the greatest danger. You can miss a step and go mad. That’s why buddhas are not listened to. You also know that this is dangerous. Moving into oneself is dangerous! A master is needed to watch every step; otherwise you will fall into an abyss, get dizzy. The mind will simply crack and it will be difficult to repair it.
These are the problems, and this is why man listens to Heraclitus, Lao Tzu, Buddha, Jesus, but never tries. Only a few try it. If you are ready to try it, you have to be aware of what it means. Just a desire to be happy won’t help – a desire to know the truth, not a desire to be happy because a man who wants to be happy will be in search of tranquilizers, narcotics. Meditation will also be a narcotic to him. He wants to sleep well, he doesn’t want to bother about what is happening. He would like to have a private world of his own dreams – of course beautiful dreams, not nightmares. That’s all he wants.
A man who is in search of truth does not think in terms of happiness. His happiness or unhappiness is not the point. He must know the true. Even if it is painful, even if it leads to hell, he is ready to pass through it. Wherever it leads, he is ready to go to it.
There are only two types of people. One is in search of happiness; he is the worldly type. He may enter a monastery, but this type doesn’t change; there he will also ask for happiness, pleasure, gratification. But now in a different way – through meditation, prayer, God – he is trying to become happy, more and more happy. The second type of person – and only two types exist – is in search of truth. This is the paradox: the one who seeks happiness will never find it because happiness is not possible unless you attain the true. Happiness is just a shadow of truth; it is nothing in itself – it is just a harmony.
When you feel one with the truth, everything fits together, falls together. You feel a rhythm and that rhythm is happiness. You cannot seek it directly. Truth has to be sought. Happiness is found when truth is found, but happiness is not the goal. If you seek happiness directly you will be more and more unhappy. At the most, your happiness will be just an intoxicant so that you can forget unhappiness; that’s all that is going to happen. Happiness is just like a drug – it is LSD, marijuana, mescaline.
Why has the West come to use drugs? It is a very, very rational process. It has to come to it because searching for happiness one has to reach LSD sooner or later. The same has happened before in India. In the Vedas they reached soma, LSD, because they were seeking happiness; they were not really seekers of truth. They were seeking more and more gratification – they came to soma. Soma is the ultimate drug. Aldous Huxley has named the ultimate drug soma, whenever it was to be found again somewhere in the twenty-first century. Whenever a society, a man, a civilization, seeks happiness, somewhere it has to come to drugs – because happiness is a search for drugs. The search for happiness is a search to forget oneself; that’s what a drug helps you to do. You forget yourself and there is no misery. You are not there, how can there be misery? You are fast asleep.
The search for truth is just the opposite dimension; not gratification, pleasure, happiness, but asking, “What is the nature of existence? What is true?” A man who seeks happiness will never find it – at the most he will find forgetfulness. A man who seeks truth will find it because to seek truth he will have to become true himself. To seek truth in existence, first he will have to seek the true in his own being. He will become more and more self-remembering.
These are the two paths: self-forgetfulness, the way of the world; and self-remembrance, the way of God. The paradox is that one who seeks happiness never finds it; one who seeks truth and doesn’t bother about happiness has always found it.
Heraclitus says, “This is the first thing to be understood: self-knowledge must be the only search, self-knowledge must be the only goal because if without knowing yourself you know everything else, it is meaningless.” You may come to know everything except yourself, but what does it mean? It cannot carry any significance – because if the knower himself is ignorant, what can his knowledge mean? What can his knowledge give? When you yourself remain in darkness you may gather millions of lights around you, but they will not fill you with light. You will remain in darkness in spite of them. You will live in darkness, you will move in darkness. That type of knowledge is science. You know a million and one things, but you don’t know yourself.
Science is all knowledge except self-knowledge. Minus self-knowledge, the seeker himself remains in darkness. It is not of much use. Religion is basically self-knowledge. You should be lit within, the darkness should disappear from within, and wherever you move your inner light falls on the path. Wherever you go, whatever you do, everything is illuminated by your inner light. This movement with the light gives you a rhythm, a harmony, which is happiness. You don’t stumble, you don’t clash, and there is no conflict. You move easily, your steps have a dance to them, and everything is a fulfillment. You don’t ask for something extraordinary to happen. You are happy. You are simply happy in your ordinariness. And unless you are happy in your ordinariness, you will never be happy.
You are happy just to breathe, just to be; you are happy just to eat, and to go to sleep again. You are happy. Now happiness is not derived from anything – it is you. A man who knows himself is happy not because of any reasons; his happiness is uncaused. It is not a thing that happens to him, it is his whole way of being. He is simply happy. Wherever he moves he takes his happiness with him. If you throw him into hell, he will create a heaven around him; a heaven will enter with him. As you are, ignorant of yourself, if you could be thrown into heaven you would create a hell there because you carry your hell with you. Wherever you go will not make much difference, you will carry your own world around you. That world is within you, your darkness. This inner darkness should disappear – that is what is meant by self-knowledge.
The second thing Heraclitus says, “This will become easy to attain if you are aware not to move to the extremes.” Remain in the middle – the golden mean ? what Buddha calls majjhim nikai, the middle way. Remain in the middle, don’t move to the extremes because when you move to the extremes you think you are going to the opposite, but the opposite is not exactly the opposite, it is a complementary whole. That is his whole teaching.
Watch people and watch yourself. One person indulges in sex too much; indulgence brings boredom, excitement is lost, he is simply bored. He starts thinking of celibacy because he is finished with indulgence. Now he is not interested in sex at all; he would like to become a monk, he would like to move to a monastery, take a vow of brahmacharya. This is going to the extreme; this is again indulgence. The extreme is indulgence. Sex is not indulgence, the extreme is indulgence. There is only one indulgence: to indulge in the extreme. He indulged in one extreme, now he is moving to the other; that too is indulgence. Sooner or later he will be fed up. Catholic monks are fed up now, so they are getting married. They have done too much. One must know where to stop, and the middle is the way.
If you can remain in the middle, the mind disappears – because the mind lives in extremes. You eat too much, then you fast and go on fasting. The first was stupid; this too is stupid. The body doesn’t need too much food and doesn’t need fasting either. It needs just a midpoint; it needs the right quantity of food. First you eat too much, you fill the body too much, and it becomes a burden. To carry it becomes a burden for you; it is not a bliss to be in the body. You move to the other extreme. Now you fast; that too is destructive. Why can’t you be in the middle? Why can’t you eat the right quantity of food and the right type of food? Why can’t you remain in the middle? If you remain in the middle, the mind disappears.
The mind exists with the extreme because the mind has to think again and again. When you eat too much, you think about fasting; when you fast, you think about food. But when you are just in the middle, balanced, what is there to think about? A man who is in the middle has nothing to think of. He is hungry, he eats – finished! He is sleepy, he sleeps – finished! What is there to think about? But you don’t sleep, and you think about sleeping; sleeping becomes a cerebral phenomenon, the mind enters. You don’t eat, or you eat too much, you have to think about it; it goes into the mind. Either you indulge in sex too much, or you become a brahmachari. In both cases it becomes cerebral. Sex enters the mind, and the mind goes on thinking around and around. Thinking exists because of extremes.
Whenever you are simply in the middle, there is no point in thinking; there is nothing to think. In the middle, thinking disappears. When you are really harmonious you have attained a rhythm. You fulfill the needs; you are neither a slave nor an enemy to them. You are neither an indulgent one nor one who is ascetic. You simply remain in the middle. Everything becomes peaceful. Heraclitus calls this, “Being temperate, moderate, balanced.”
Balance has to be gained in everything. Through balance you will come nearer to truth because truth is the ultimate balance. When you are balanced, suddenly the doors open.
Now try to understand these sutras:
It pertains to all men
to know themselves
and to be temperate.
To be temperate is the way to know oneself. Watch your mind and you will always see it insists on the extreme; it enjoys the extreme, it indulges in the extreme. When you are just in the middle, the mind is unemployed, unoccupied.

Somebody asked a Zen master, “What is your way?”
He replied, “When I feel hungry, I eat; when I feel sleepy, I go to sleep – this is my way. I never eat when I am not hungry, and I never fast when I am hungry – this is my way.”
The man said, “But this doesn’t seem much of a way – we all do this.”
The master laughed and said, “If you did all this, there would be no need to come to me.”

Either you eat too much, or you eat too little. The mind always has a tendency to find causes for being miserable. It is simply wonderful, the mind is simply wonderful – it is so skilled at finding causes to be miserable. It creates all your miseries because in a blissful state the mind will die. It is against all bliss. You are in misery; it will suggest to you that this is not good, do that. It will suggest just the opposite. Be alert; when the mind suggests just the opposite, don’t follow it! Always find the golden mean. Don’t listen to the mind, know where to stop.
Lao Tzu has said, “I give you three treasures: one is love; the second is never go to the extreme; the third is be natural.” And he says that everything will take care of itself. Why will everything take care of itself if you follow these simple things?
The mind is a perfect expert in creating miseries. A young man came to me and said, “I would like to live just on water.” Why? Why just on water? He is already miserable. He has been eating too much. Now that has become a hell, now he wants to create another hell – because how can you live just on water? That will be another hell, and from that hell you will move to another hell. From hell to hell is the passage of the mind. Somewhere between two hells is heaven, but the mind always bypasses it.
Between two hells is heaven, so know where to stop. Just in the middle, stop! Don’t eat too much and don’t fast. But you will not be able to become very egoistic about it because eating too much can be egoistic.

Mulla Nasruddin goes on talking about his capacity to eat, and many times I have heard him saying: “I can eat ninety-nine kachoris!”
So I said to him, “Why not make it a hundred?”
He replied, “What do you think of me? Just because of one kachori, am I a liar. Why should I lie?”

Bragging – people brag about how much they can eat, and other people brag about how much they can fast, but the bragging remains the same. Criminals brag, and your so-called saints. Both are in the same boat – because bragging is the boat.

I have heard that a criminal entered a prison cell. His cellmate who was already there asked, “How long do you have to be here?” He was an old master.
The young, new one said, “Just fifteen years.”
His cellmate said, “Then keep your bed near the door. You will be leaving soon. I am sentenced to twenty-five more years.”

If you are sentenced for twenty-five years you are a great criminal. But just fifteen? – you are just a beginner, an amateur. Even criminals brag about how much they can do, how much they have done. If they commit one murder, they claim seven. Saints also do the same. What is the difference? In India, saints publish how many days they fasted this year.

A man came to me with his wife. In describing her husband his wife said, “He is a very, very generous man. Up to now he has donated almost one lakh rupees.”
The man looked at his wife and corrected her. “Not one lakh – one lakh ten thousand.”

You give and you don’t give – because if the ego is fulfilled through giving, nothing is being given. The ego cannot share. The ego can never be generous; that is not its nature. The ego always fulfills itself by the opposite. Know this trap well.
Heraclitus says:
It pertains to all men
to know themselves
and to be temperate.

To be temperate is the greatest virtue.
It really is. I have not come across anything greater than being temperate. There is nothing like it. Why? Why is it the greatest virtue? – because it simply destroys your ego, and the ego is the only sin. Because of the ego you miss the divine. And just being ordinary, in the middle, what can you claim? Can you claim that you eat the right quantity of food? Can you claim that you move into sex exactly in the middle, just right? Can you claim anything from the middle? No, that’s not possible. Indulge in sex and you can claim that even at the age of fifty you can make love thrice a day. Or become a brahmachari, a celibate, and claim that you are a virgin, having never made love to anyone. What can you claim by just being in the middle? In the middle there is nothing to claim. When there is nothing to claim and declare, the ego is not fed. Just be ordinary and in the middle – this is the greatest virtue.
To be ordinary is the greatest virtue because when you are just ordinary, with nothing to claim of this world or that, the ego disappears. The ego feeds on imbalance, the ego feeds on extremes. The ego lives on the polarities – in the middle it disappears. In every area, in every direction of life, remember, just stop in the middle and soon you will find the mind has stopped, the ego has stopped. With nothing to claim, it disappears; when it disappears you have become virtuous. Now the door is open for the divine. You meet him in the middle; at the extremes you miss.
Wisdom consists in speaking and acting the truth,
giving heed to the nature of things.
Heraclitus is just like Lao Tzu, exactly the same. He says: Wisdom consists in speaking and acting the truth… Try, because to know the truth is going to be a long journey. Much preparation will be needed. Before the truth can descend on you, you will have to become a vehicle. You will have to be completely empty for the guest to come because only your emptiness can become the host. What to do right now? If you are a seeker of truth, Heraclitus says, “Speak and act truth.” If you speak truth, there is not much to say; you will become more and more silent automatically.
It happened…

A lady had just left a ladies’ club and the other ladies were talking about her. One said, “She seems to be very sweet, but – yakety-yakety-yak. I couldn’t think how she would stop herself.”
Another member said, “But is everything she says true?”
“I should say not,” said the third lady, “because that much truth simply doesn’t exist!”

If you want to be true you will become silent – because ninety-nine percent of what you talk about is simply untrue; it will drop automatically. There are two types of silence. One that you force upon yourself, which is not really silence. You can cut off your tongue, but that will not be the silence. You can close your mouth, that will not be a true silence because inside ? yakkety-yak. It goes on and on and on. True silence comes if you start talking truth. Only say that which you know is true; otherwise don’t speak. What is left to say? – not much. A silence descends on you which is totally different. It is not a forced silence. It comes spontaneously because there is nothing to say.
First, when you have nothing to say, you start being silent with people; you talk less and listen more. By and by, the inside talking also stops because if you cannot speak untruth to other people, how can you go on talking about it inside? The whole thing becomes absurd. Inside you talk too much because that is just a rehearsal for talking outside. If you can listen to people, not talking much, just the truth – that for which you can vouch, that to which you can say, “I am a witness” – a silence will come to you. A silence not forced, a silence not disciplined, a silence that comes naturally.
Heraclitus says, “Speak and act the truth, and act only in such a way that it comes out of your feeling of truth.” In the beginning it will be difficult because your whole life depends on lies. In the beginning you will always feel out of step with others, but soon everything settles again in a new pattern, a new gestalt arises.
The interim period is going to be difficult. First, watch in how many ways you lie. You smile and you don’t feel like smiling within. It is a lie. Don’t smile because you are being violent to the lips, to the face. If you go on doing it for long you will completely forget the feeling of a smile, what a true smile is. Only small children know; you have completely forgotten what a true smile is. You simply smile; it is a gesture, false. You smile as a polite mannerism. You smile because people expect you to smile. You smile not knowing what you are doing. Why are you forcing your lips? If your smile has become false, what can be true in you? Your tears have also become false. You weep when it is required; otherwise you suppress.
Watch in how many millions of ways you have become untrue. You say things you don’t mean. You use words completely unconsciously – then you are trapped by them. You say to someone, “You are beautiful.” It may just have been a mannerism of yours, but you have touched the other person, you have stirred something. The other person may start feeling that you really feel that way. Now expectations arise, and soon frustrations will follow because you had said it just by the way, you never meant it. Now you are in a trap; you have to fulfill the expectation. Now you feel burdened.
Be true and you will be less burdened. Be true; don’t create false expectations around you, otherwise you will be in a prison, trapped! Say exactly what you mean and always say, “This I mean in this moment. For the next moment I cannot say anything – because who knows what will happen in the next moment? I love you this moment, but how can I speak for the next moment?”
Only an enlightened person can say something about the next moment because he has come to a point where everything is eternal. But how can you speak about the next moment? Your moods change. This moment you feel, “I love,” and this moment you can say, “I will love you forever and ever.” This is true only in this moment; how can you say anything about the next moment? Be alert and make the statement conditional: “This is how I feel only in this moment – nobody knows about the next moment. I cannot promise anything.”
All your promises are untrue – how can you promise? A promise means you have attained a crystallized center. How can you keep a promise? You say to a woman, “I will love you forever and ever.” How can you keep this promise? After just a few days you feel the excitement has disappeared, now there is no love – what to do? Now you have to smile falsely. And because of the promise you have to kiss this woman, you have to make love to this woman. Now everything becomes false. You become untrue. Now you feel guilty if you don’t fulfill it. If you fulfill it, it is untrue, you are acting. It cannot make you ecstatic – it will create more anxiety and burdens. It cannot be a fulfillment, it will be a frustration. The more you force yourself to love the woman, the more you will take revenge because this woman has become a millstone around your neck. Now you feel that if she goes away somehow it will be good. If she dies it will be good. Now you will find a way to escape – just because of a promise! A promise that is given in a moment and given for one life is not possible for you. You live in moments. You don’t have an eternal center in you yet, you have just a wheel-like periphery that moves. This is how you are trapped.
You cannot love, you cannot laugh, you cannot weep – everything is untrue, and you are in search of truth. No, it is not possible. You have to be true to meet truth, because only the same can meet the same. An untrue person cannot reach the truth; only a true person can reach the truth.
Be alert, don’t promise. Just say that this moment it appears so. Of course, it will give you a feeling of helplessness; the ego cannot stand. The ego can say, “I will, forever and ever.” You will feel helpless that you cannot give even this promise ? but it is being true. I know that if even for a single moment you can love another person totally, that will change you; that will give you a taste of truth. But be true. Say what you mean. If you don’t know, if you are confused in a situation, don’t speak – or simply put your confusion out, express it. Before you act, act with full awareness that this is going to give you a truer being. Be authentic.
You go on doing millions of things that you don’t want to do. Who is forcing you? You simply drift. Nobody is forcing you to do those things. Why do you do them? ? you are not aware. It is just a chain; you do one thing, then another arises. One thing leads to another and you go on and on. When will you stop? Every moment is the right moment to stop. Just watch and start falling out of the chain of lies that you have created.
Of course, you will feel very, very humiliated, humble, helpless. But if that’s true, feel it. When it comes from your heart, weep when you want to. Don’t stop; don’t say, “I am a man, I cannot be a sissy, I cannot behave like a woman.” Don’t say that. Nobody is so totally a man and nobody can be. Man is also woman, woman is also man; both meet and mingle inside. Weep, because if you cannot weep authentically you cannot smile. You will be afraid. When you would like to laugh you will be afraid because tears may start; they are suppressed there so you cannot laugh. When you cannot laugh, you cannot weep; it becomes a vicious circle. When you are angry, be angry and take the consequences – be truly angry.
This has been my observation. If you are truly angry, nobody is offended by it – nobody! But your anger is impotent, dead. If you are a father and feel angry with your child, be angry and your child will never feel antagonistic toward you. But when you are angry, you smile, and the child simply detects it because a child is innocent; he has clear eyes, more clarity than you have. He simply detects the falsity – that you are angry and you are smiling. He will never be able to forgive you because you are being untrue. A child never feels so bad about anything as he feels about untruth. Be authentic. If you feel like hitting the child, hit him, but don’t be untrue. And when you feel repentance, ask for forgiveness, and be true in that.
A husband who has never said anything in anger to his wife will not be able to love because everything remains false, on the surface. If you cannot bring deep anger out, how can you bring deep love? If you are so afraid of being angry, that shows that you are not confident of love. You are afraid that things may fall apart, the relationship may break up; that’s why you are afraid. But then this relationship is not worth much. If it cannot pass through anger and mature, it is not worth much. Drop it before it becomes a commitment – but be true.
You will have to suffer through truth, but that suffering is needed. Through suffering you will mature, your inner being will become seasoned. You will attain a sharpness and clarity that only comes through encounter, that only comes through facing facts. When you are angry, be truly angry so that you can be truly forgiving. When you don’t want to give a thing, simply say, “I don’t want to give it,” but don’t find excuses. Don’t find excuses because you are creating a pattern every moment, and that pattern can become so ingrained that you will have to follow it. Come out of it – and every moment is a right moment.
Heraclitus says: Wisdom consists in speaking and acting the truth, giving heed to the nature of things. Look at the nature of things. Watch the natural and drop the artificial. The artificial may look beautiful, but it is not alive. Watch the natural and always move with nature. Never move with the artificial. Civilization is artificial, society is artificial – everything seems to be artificial.
I knew a man once, an old, retired professor, a neighbor. People thought that he was a little bit out of his mind, as a retired professor of philosophy is bound to be. But I don’t make judgments, so I listened, and I never really thought much about him. One day, I was just passing by and I had to look twice because he was using a watering can with no bottom. The watering can had no bottom! There was no water in it, and he was making all the gestures of watering his plants. So I said to him, “Hey, what are you doing? Your watering can has no bottom!”
He replied, “I know that, but it doesn’t matter because these flowers are artificial.”
Your whole life has become artificial – plastic flowers. From a distance they look good, but if you come close they are plastic. Of course, they don’t die so soon. They cannot die, they are plastic flowers, but a thing that cannot die is not alive.
A real flower has to pass through millions of hazards. How humble a real flower is, how fragile. In the morning it is there, how fragile! And against this whole world. Storms and clouds come, the rain, animals, children and everything. A fragile flower exists against all this. That is the beauty; by the evening it is gone. You will not find it again, it will no longer be there – but it is alive. In the morning it is there in its total beauty, and by the evening it is faded, gone, dust unto dust – but it was alive. Your plastic flower is dead, that’s why it cannot die. Everything alive will die; only dead things never die.
Remember, don’t be afraid of death and don’t be afraid that things may disappear. Untruth never dies. Truth dies millions of times and resurrects again and again. Remember this. Untruth is like a plastic flower, secure. That’s why marriage is secure. A marriage which has been arranged by parents, by society is more secure. Love is fragile like a flower in the morning; by the evening it is gone. Nobody knows how it comes, how it goes. It is mysterious. Marriage is nothing mysterious, it is a calculation. You go to an astrologer, he finds the chart and arranges it. Of course, parents are wiser than you, worldly wise, they have known much. They arrange it all; they look for many things that a lover would never think about – the money, the prestige and millions of things; they think of security. When someone falls in love he cannot think of anything else.
Remember, a dead thing never dies – that is the security in it, but it is dead. It is always possible that an alive thing may disappear at any moment; that is the trouble with life. But it is alive, and worth taking all risks for.
Be true. There will be many, many troubles, but each trouble will make you more mature. And being true, talking, acting true, you are getting ready for truth to descend. When you attain a certain maturity, suddenly the door opens. There is no other way.
Listening to me but not to the Logos,
it is wise to acknowledge
that all things are one.
Heraclitus says: Listening to me… I would also say, “Listening to me, it is wise to acknowledge that all things are one.” If you listen to the logos ? the logos means: the law, the tao, the rit, the basic; the logos is the ultimate stratum of existence. You don’t know anything about it. You have never penetrated that depth. It is also in you, near the center, but you have lived on the periphery so you don’t know about it. Heraclitus says, “But listening to me” – listening to a Buddha, to Heraclitus, to Lao Tzu – “it is good to acknowledge that all things are one.” This is not your experience yet.
Here enters trust, shraddha, faith. Religion cannot exist without trust because you don’t know what the ultimate stratum is. There is no way to prove it, there is no way to argue about it. If you know, you know; if you don’t know, you don’t know. What to do about it? There is only one possibility: to listen to a Heraclitus – not only to what he says, but to listen to his being, what he is. You will come to acknowledge one thing, that one exists in this diversity, in this “too-manyness” of the world. Behind it, one exists.
You have been listening to me ? you have listened to me from many, many dimensions. Sometimes on the periphery you feel I am contradictory; if you listen not only to my words but to me, to my presence, you will never feel any contradiction. If you feel, not just think, by and by you will start feeling that whatever I say is the same. Whatever I say, whether through Heraclitus, Jesus, Buddha, Lao Tzu, Chuang Tzu, I always say the same thing. The language differs, words differ, but not the logos of it.
Listening to me…it is wise to acknowledge that all things are one. When you can listen to the logos itself, you will know; there will be no need to acknowledge it. You will know, and there will be no need to trust. Trust is needed because you don’t know and you need somebody who knows. You need the hand of somebody who knows, who can take you from the known to the unknown, who can take you to the uncharted. Without trust it is not possible; otherwise how will you come with me to the unknown? If you don’t trust me, how can you come with me to the unknown? You will always stick to the boundary of the known. You will say, “Up to here I know that I am safe; beyond this is wilderness. And who are you to take me into the wilderness? Why should I trust you?”
At the boundary where known and unknown meet, there is no way except trust. You have to be in a love affair with a master, nothing less than that will do because only love can trust. It has to be a heart-to-heart, depth-to-depth relationship; it has to be intimate.
That’s why I go on insisting on sannyas and initiation. Unless you trust me, totally, you will cling to the known, to the mind, your ego –what is the point? You have to take at least one step with me without asking why. Love never asks why because love trusts.
A small child has to trust his father; the father takes his hand and the child follows. He’s not worried; wherever the father is going, he goes, happily. He is not worried about what is going to happen. That is trust. If the child stops and says, “Where are you going and where are you leading me? What do you mean by trust, and how can I trust you?” He will immediately stop growing, and there is no possibility of growth. The child has to trust the mother, the father.
A master is nothing but a father into the unknown. You are learning to walk again, you are learning to search and seek again, you are moving into something – you don’t know what it is, where you are headed.
This is what Heraclitus means:
Listening to me…
It is wise to acknowledge
that all things are one.

Wisdom is one –
to know the intelligence by which
all things are steered through all things.
Wisdom is one and unique;
it is unwilling and yet willing
to be called by the name of Zeus.
Zeus is the supreme god. Wisdom is both willing and unwilling to be called the supreme god. It is paradoxical and very difficult for the mind to understand.
Buddha says, “There is no god” – unwilling. He also says, “No need to worship me, find your own light” – unwilling to declare his wisdom, his consciousness, to be the supreme god. The next moment he says, “Come and surrender to me.” The next moment he contradicts himself. Why is it? – because a man who has reached, arrived, has no ego, so it is difficult for him to claim anything, unwilling. The wisdom is unwilling to declare itself the supreme god, but it is. The ego is not there to claim, but it is so. It is a fact, so it cannot be denied either.
So what to do? If a Buddha says, “I am not the supreme god,” he is untrue. If he says, “I am the supreme god,” it gives a tinge of ego. So what is he supposed to do? Either way there is difficulty. If he says, “I am the god,” you may think he is an egoist. If he says, “I am not a god at all,” it is untrue. So sometimes he says, “Yes, I am”; sometimes he says, “I am not.” You have to find the balance between these two. He is both somewhere in between. He is not a god because he is no longer an ego, there is nobody to claim. He is a god precisely because there is no ego, precisely because there is nobody to claim.
Wisdom is one and unique; it is unwilling and yet willing to be called by the name of Zeus. Hence, all the contradictions of all the enlightened ones. Whatever they say they have to contradict immediately because they are saying something which is unique, one. The unique and the one cannot be put into any language because language depends on duality. If they say, “I am light,” who will be the darkness? Language depends on the duality; light means not darkness. But a man who has attained is both light and dark together. He is both – all the dualities together – that is the mystery. And because of this mystery Aristotle said, “This man Heraclitus is defective somewhere. Either his mind is defective, or his character because he talks in absurdities.”
Arthur Koestler came to the East to watch people who have attained samadhi. He reported back to the West: “They are mad, absurd because they talk absurdities. This moment they say something, the next moment they contradict themselves.”
Wisdom is vast, it contains all the opposites together. You need a feeling heart to penetrate this absurdity; that is trust. Trust is the weapon to penetrate the absurdity of an enlightened man – then suddenly everything fits. You suddenly see through all the absurdity to the one, the unique.
Enough for today.

============================================================

God is day and night, winter and summer,
war and peace, satiety and want.

Seawater is at once very pure and very foul:
it is drinkable and healthful for fishes,
but undrinkable and deadly for men.

The nature of day and night are as one.

The way up and the way down
are one and the same.

Even sleepers are workers and collaborators
in what goes on in the universe.

In the circle
the beginning and the end are common.
A thousand and one difficulties have arisen because man has always taken God to be person. God is not a person. All the problems that theology deals with are simply futile exercises – the base being that God is taken to be a person.
God is not a person and cannot be. Let it go as deep in you as possible because that will become a door, an opening. For those who have been raised as Jews, Christians, Mohammedans, it is particularly difficult to take God as anything else but as a person – that becomes a closing. To think about God as a person is anthropocentric. In the Bible it is said that God created man in his own image, but just the contrary seems to be the case – man has created God in his own image. Men differ, that’s why there are so many gods in the world.
When the first Christian missionaries reached Africa, they were in trouble – because they painted God as white and the Devil as black, and the Negroes felt very offended. They wouldn’t listen to them because from the very beginning there was conflict with the image. One missionary simply got the idea and changed the colors. He made God black and the Devil white, and the Negroes were very happy – they could accept it. A Negro is bound to paint his God in his own image, a Chinese in his own, an Indian in his own. We paint God as our own reflection – of course, perfect – but your image cannot be God. You are just a part, a very tiny part, one atom in existence. How can the whole be conceived in the image of the part? The whole transcends the part, the whole is infinitely vast. If you cling to the atom, if you cling to the part, you will miss the whole.
God is not to be conceived in your image; rather, on the contrary, you have to drop your image, you have to become imageless. Only then do you become a mirror and the whole reflects in you.
As man has been seeking more and more, this has become clearer and clearer – that God as a person creates trouble because you are always in conflict with other Gods. That’s why the Jewish, Hindu Mohammedan, Christian God, all exist. This is sheer nonsense! How can God be Christian, Hindu, or Mohammedan? There are different Gods because Jews have their own idea of God, and Hindus have their own idea, so the conflict is bound to be there. Hindus think that God speaks the Sanskrit language; the English think that he is an English gentleman.

It is said that a German and an Englishman were talking. The German said, “We plan in every way, but why are we defeated every time?”
The Englishman replied, “You have to be defeated because whenever we start fighting, first we pray to God and he looks after us. You are to be defeated; you can never be victorious.”
The German said, “But we also pray.”
The Englishman laughed and said, “But who understands German?”

To an Englishman, God is an Englishman. To Adolf Hitler he must be Nordic. He has to be because we create our own image.

I was just reading a memoir of an army priest. This priest was attached to Montgomery’s wing. One day, when they were ready to attack, it was so cloudy and cold with so much mist that it seemed impossible to move. So the priest has written that Montgomery called him and said, “Pray to God immediately and tell him that we, his soldiers, are on the march and what is he doing? Is he in conspiracy with the enemy? Tell him to stop all this immediately!”
The priest was surprised: “A man like Montgomery – what is he talking about?” He said, “But this won’t look good. It doesn’t look good to say to God, ‘What are you doing? Stop this immediately because we are on the move and we are your soldiers.’”
The priest felt a little embarrassed, but Montgomery said, “Listen to my order! You are my priest, attached to my army, so whatever I say you have to do. Go and pray immediately!”

This happens. It looks absurd and foolish, but this is happening all the time, to everyone, to all people. If you take God as a person this is bound to happen. You start communicating with him as a person. He is not a person. There are millions of atheists because you have taken God to be a person. The atheist is not against God, but he is against your conception of God as a person because the whole concept is foolish. Think about what anguish you must be putting your God in because Germans are praying for victory, the English are praying for victory, and everybody thinks that God is with them, on their side.
I have heard…

Once Junnaid, a Sufi mystic, dreamed that he saw himself as dead, and the greatest sinner of the town was also dead; both reached God’s door and knocked. The sinner was received and the saint was rejected. He felt very, very hurt. He had always expected that he would be received, welcomed, so what was happening? – just the opposite. He knew this man who was being received with such ceremony. When the ceremony was over and the sinner was sent to his abode, the saint said, “I have to ask God just one question. What are you doing? I have been continuously praying twenty-four hours, day and night, calling your name. Even in my sleep I have been calling your name and chanting!”
God replied, “Precisely because of that – you have pestered me so much that now that you have come to heaven I am really afraid of you. What will you do here? On earth, from so far away, for twenty-four hours a day you have not left me a single moment of peace! This man is good, that’s why we are celebrating. He never bored me, never pestered me; he never used my name, never created any trouble for me.”

God as a person is just foolish, the whole concept is foolish. He cannot be a person because he has to be every person – how can he be a person himself? He cannot be someone because he is everyone, and he cannot be anywhere because he is everywhere. You cannot define him, and personality is a definition. You cannot limit him, and as a person he becomes limited. Personality is just like a wave that comes and goes, and he is like an ocean. He is immense – he abides. Personalities come and go, they are forms; they are there and then they are no longer there. Forms change; forms change continuously into the opposites, and he is the formless. He cannot be defined, it cannot be said who he is. He is all. The moment you say, “He is all,” the problem of how to communicate arises. There is no need; you cannot communicate with him like a person. You have to communicate with him in a totally different dimension – that dimension is of energy, of consciousness, not of personality. God is energy and absolute awareness. God is bliss, ecstasy; indefinable, unlimited; no beginning, no end; always and always, eternal, timeless, beyond space – because God means the total.
The total cannot have a personality – this is the first thing to be understood, very, very deeply; not only intellectually, but as totally as possible because if you conceive, feel, grope toward God as totality, your prayer will be different. Your prayer will not be a foolish prayer, and he cannot be on your side – he is on every side. He is with your enemy as much as with you, and he is as much in the saint as in the sinner – because he is all. He is as much in the dark as in the light. He comprehends all. All opposites meet and mingle and become one in him. Because of the concept of God as a person we have to create a Devil against God because where will you put all the negativity! You have to create someone to throw all the negativity on. Your God then becomes false, your Devil too because negatives and positives exist together, not separately. All that you like you put on God’s side. It is your division. God cannot be divided – he is undivided.
The first thing: God is not a person. And remember, you are also not a person. It is ignorance, self-ignorance; that’s why you appear like a person. If you move deeper, soon the personality becomes blurred; a moment comes when you don’t know who you are. You may have noticed many times that if someone wakes you suddenly, you don’t know where you are – whether it is morning or evening, whether it is your house or somewhere else; you may not know what town it is. For a single moment everything is blurred, no time sense, no space sense, and you don’t know who you are. Why does it happen? – it happens because in deep sleep you move toward the center, of course unconsciously, but at the center there is no personality, an impersonal energy exists. If someone suddenly wakes you, you have to move from the center to the periphery in such a rush that there is no time to gather your personality. In a sudden rush you simply lose identity – and this is your reality, this is in fact, who you are.
When you are in deep meditation you will become more and more aware of the indefinable, the unlimited. First, it will look like a blurred phenomenon, and you may even become afraid, scared: “What is happening to me? Am I losing my mind? Am I going mad?” If you become afraid you will miss. Don’t worry, it is natural. You are moving to the indefinable from the defined; in between there will be ground where everything will become blurred.
That’s why Zen masters have said: “Before one enters the path, rivers are rivers, mountains are mountains. When one enters the path, rivers are no longer rivers, mountains are no longer mountains. When one has achieved the goal, again rivers are rivers, mountains are mountains.” What do they mean? ? they mean that there comes a moment when everything becomes blurred. That is the time a school, a master, will be needed because when everything is blurred you are again like a small child – helpless, not knowing who you are, identity lost, not knowing where you are going, not knowing what is happening; a school is needed. This is the meaning of an ashram, a monastery, where many people exist on many levels and they can help each other. A master exists on the ultimate level – you need not be afraid, you can always look toward him.
When your identity is lost the master is your only source of sanity – you will be insane. Many people work alone and many people go mad. If you move in the East, you will find many people who are just hanging ? they have worked without a master; they came to the blurred territory, and now they don’t know where to go. They have forgotten from where they came and now they don’t know where to go. They don’t know who they are. They are absolutely mad. They are better than you, but mad. Now they cannot take any step because who will take the step and where? At this moment a master is needed.
One of the greatest works Meher Baba did in his life and it has never been done before – he lived just near Pune and he is one of the greatest masters – he traveled all over India for years, just making contact with such mad people. Not doing anything else, just doing this one thing. He moved from one village to another, making contact with such people who had gone mad, who were on a better ground than you but some help was needed – just a push. Just a push so that again rivers become rivers, mountains become mountains. And they achieve a new identity again.
The old identity was with the form, the new identity will be with the formless. The old identity was with the name, the new identity will be with the nameless. The old identity was of this world, the new identity will be of that world. You can hang suspended between the two if there is no school, if there is no master to help you and bring it out. You can enter this wilderness, but coming out will be difficult on your own. Sometimes, accidentally, somebody does come out – that’s not the point – but as a rule it is almost impossible for you to come out.
I have seen many mad people. Whenever somebody comes to me and wants to do everything on his own, I feel very much for him because he doesn’t know what he is talking about. This is the problem. I cannot force anything because the more you force the more he will escape. I can simply say, “Okay, do whatever you like” – but I feel deeply because I know where he is unknowingly moving. God is energy, and if you are not prepared it can be destructive. God is such vital, infinite energy, that if your vehicle is not ready you will simply crack. So the question is not just to know God. A deeper question is how to be ready before you can say, “Now you can come,” before you can invite him – because you are so small and he is so vast. It is as if a drop of water is calling the ocean to come in. The ocean can come in any time, but what will happen to the drop? The drop has to attain a capacity, a receptivity so infinite that the ocean drops into the drop and disappears, and the drop is not shattered. That art is the greatest, and that art is religion, Yoga, Tantra, or whatever name you want to give it.
Don’t look at God according to your conceptions: Jewish, Christian, Hindu. Drop them! That is clinging to the periphery, to knowledge. You cling to whatever you have been taught and God cannot be taught, nobody can teach him – of course, indicated, shown in subtle and indirect ways, but he cannot be taught. Whatever you know about God is wrong – and I say “whatever” unconditionally. Whatever you know is wrong because that has come from teachings; someone has taught you a conception, a theory, and God is not a conception, not a theory; he is not a hypothesis. It is nothing like that – it is absolutely different.
Drop all conceptions, only then are you ready to take the first step. You go to him naked, with no conception, with no clothes about you. You go to him vacant, with no ideas about him in your mind. You go to him empty because that is the only way to go; empty, you become a door, he can enter. Only receptivity is needed, not concepts, not philosophies, doctrines – this is what Heraclitus means. These words are very, very wonderful.
Listen:
God is day and night, winter and summer,
war and peace, satiety and want.
Never have such wonderful words been uttered before and never since. God is day and night, winter and summer, war and peace, satiety and want. Many have said many things about God, but no one is comparable to Heraclitus. There have been people who have said, “God is light,” but where do you put the dark? You then have to explain where the dark comes from. Many have said, “God is day. God is sun, light, the source of light,” but from where does the night come? Where does the dark come from ? the Devil, sin? From where? Why have people talked about God as light?
Something psychological is involved. Man is afraid of darkness; man feels very good when there is light – it is part of your fear. Why do you call God light? The Koran, the Upanishads, the Bible all say, “God is light.” There has only been a small school – in that small school where Jesus was taught and brought up to be ready to receive the divine – and that small school was known as the Essenes; they were the teachers and masters of Jesus. Only that school says, “God is dark, night.” They never say, “God is light”; they move to the other extreme. They are beautiful people.
Try to understand the symbol, light-and-dark. You are not afraid in the light because you can see. Nobody can easily attack you. You can defend, escape, fight or take flight. You can do something, everything is known. Light is the symbol of the known – with the known you don’t feel fear.
Darkness is the unknown. Fear arises in the heart, and you don’t know what is happening all around you. Anything is possible and you are indefensible. Light is security, darkness is insecurity. Light looks like life and darkness like death. Afraid, scared – not only psychologically, but also biologically because man has lived for thousands of years in the dark, in the night, in the wild, forest, caves. The night was a problem because wild animals could attack and man was indefensible. So when fire was invented, it became the first god; it became a protection, a security. With the day everything is okay, with the night you don’t know where you are; with the night everything disappears.
So man is prone to identify God with light. Light has a few beautiful things about it. It is warm, it is a source of energy – you cannot live without the sun, nothing can exist without the sun. Deep down, all life is solar energy; the energy that comes from the sun. You eat it, you drink it – you live through it. If the sun simply disappears, goes cold, within ten minutes life on this earth will disappear – within ten minutes because it takes ten minutes for the rays to reach us. If the sun dies, the old rays will come for ten minutes, but by the tenth minute new rays will not come, and everything will simply die. We will not even be aware of what is happening; nobody will know that we have died. The whole planet will die – the trees, the animals, the birds, man, everything! Life exists through the sun – it is warm, welcoming.
Darkness also has beautiful things about it; it is infinite. Light always has a limit; darkness is limitless. Deep down light is exciting, it excites you; darkness is absolutely unexciting. Light is warm, darkness is cool, cool like death, mysterious. Light comes and goes; darkness remains. That’s why the Essenes called God the dark, the night, because light comes and goes, darkness remains, and is eternal. Light seems to be an episode, it happens. You can arrange for light, but you cannot arrange for darkness; it seems beyond you. You can put the light on and off, but you cannot put the dark on and off. It seems beyond you – it is! Light is manageable. If it is dark you can bring light in, but you cannot bring darkness, you cannot manipulate darkness; it is simply beyond your control. You put your light on, but you know it is momentary. When the fuel is finished the light will go – but darkness is eternal, it is always there. It exists as if without any cause, uncaused; it was always there, it will always be there. So the Essenes chose darkness as the symbol of God, but Heraclitus alone chooses both.
To choose one extreme is still logical, rational; reason is working. To choose both together is irrational; reason is simply bewildered. God is day and night – both together, no choice – winter and summer, war and peace… It will be difficult for people like Tolstoy, Gandhi, Bertrand Russell, if God is war and peace. They think God is peace; war is created by men. War is ugly, something the Devil may have invented – God is peace. Tolstoy cannot agree, a Gandhi cannot agree that God is also war. A Hitler also cannot agree that God is peace; God is war. Nietzsche also cannot agree that God is peace; God is war.
They are choosers. Heraclitus is not a chooser, he is simply a choiceless awareness. He doesn’t choose, he simply says whatever the case is. He doesn’t bring his own morality into it, he does not bring his own mind into it, he simply reflects; he is a mirror. Gandhi, Tolstoy, Ruskin, are all choosers; they have their own idea to impose on God. They impose the idea of peace, that God is peace; then war is from the Devil. But it is not possible.
What is peace without war? Is there any possibility of peace without war? Won’t that peace be simply dead if there is no war? Just think: no war in the world, just peace. What type of peace will it be? ? it will be cold, it will be a dark night, dead. War gives intensity, tone, sharpness, life. But if there is only war and no peace, then too death will happen. If you choose one opposite of the polarity, if you choose one polarity, everything will be dead because life exists between polarities: war and peace; satiety and want; contentment and discontentment; hunger, want, desire, passion, peace, satiety, contentment; the way and the goal. Difficult to comprehend, but this is the truth.
It is God who desires in you and it is God who becomes desireless in you. This is total acceptance. It is God who is a passion in you and it is God who becomes enlightenment in you. It is God who is anger in you and it is God who becomes compassion in you. There is nothing to choose! But just look at the fact: if there is nothing to choose and everything is God, your ego simply disappears – because it exists with choosing. If there is nothing to choose and everything is just as it is, nothing can be done and God is both. With the chooser, with the choice, the ego disappears. You accept, you simply accept. When you are hungry and when you are satisfied, both are beautiful.
This is difficult for the mind. The mind staggers, feels bewildered, loses ground, feels dizzy – as if you are standing on the edge of an abyss. Why does it happen? – it happens because the mind wants a clear-cut choice: “Either this or that.” Heraclitus says, “Neither this nor that – or both.” Ask Mahavira, Buddha and they will say, “Desire? Leave desire. Become desireless – choose! Become content, deeply content; leave discontent!” Heraclitus penetrates even deeper. He says, “Who is there to leave? Who will leave? God is both!” And if you feel this, that God is both, everything is hallowed, everything becomes holy. Then in hunger also there is a contentment; in desire there is also a desirelessness; in anger there is also compassion. If you haven’t known compassionate anger, anger which is compassion, you have not known life at all. You have missed the greatest climax, if you haven’t known darkness which is also light, coolness which is also warmth.
Where opposites meet, ecstasy happens; where opposites meet, the ultimate, the ultimate orgasm with the universe. God is both man and woman, war and peace.
Man has been in difficulty because he has always been choosing. Society has always remained lopsided, all societies and civilizations have remained lopsided because everything depends on choice. We have created a society in the world which is male-oriented, war-oriented. The woman has been cut out, she has no contribution to make – she is dark, peace, silence, passivity, compassion, not war; woman is satiety, not desire. Man is desire – the excitement, the adventure, war; always going somewhere, always reaching somewhere, finding something, seeking, searching. Man is the vagabond, woman is the home. But when they both meet – when the vagabond meets the home, where desire and satiety meet, where activity and passivity meet – there arises the greatest harmony, the hidden harmony.
We created the male-oriented society, so there is war, and the peace is not true. Our peace is just a gap between two wars; it is not true, it is just a preparation for another war. Go back and look at history ? the gap between the World Wars I and II is not peace. The gap is just the getting ready for another war. It is not real peace, it is just a preparation. If peace is not real, the war will also be unreal.
In the past, war was beautiful; now it is ugly because it has no opposite to it. In the past, warriors were beautiful people; now warriors are just ugly. War doesn’t give you anything; otherwise, it is an adventure, it brings you to a peak of existence, you put yourself totally into it. Warriors were beautiful; they encountered death, they went to meet death on the front. Now a warrior is nowhere to be seen – he is hidden behind the tanks, throwing bombs, not knowing who is going to be destroyed. Can you call this man who dropped the atom bomb on Hiroshima a warrior? What type of warrior is he? He drops the atom bomb, immediately kills one lakh people, not knowing whom he is killing, who the enemy is – small children…
I was looking at a picture someone sent me from Japan. A small child is going upstairs to his room where he would study and go to sleep; a very small child, carrying his bag of books and thinking of his homework. First he would do his homework and then go to sleep. He was just on the staircase when the bomb fell. He was totally burned and became just a dot on the wall, still clinging to his bag with the books inside; his mind thinking about the homework, of the next day, tomorrow morning – everything is burned. The man who dropped the bomb was not even aware of who died; he went back home and had a good sleep. Hiding himself, he had done his duty. What type of war is this? It has become ugly. In the old days, to be a warrior was one of the greatest possibilities – bringing your potential to a peak. But now it is nothing, it is just like an ordinary mechanical duty; you push the button and the bomb falls and kills – you are not confronting anybody. War without real peace becomes false. When war is false, how can peace be real?
We have been choosing. We have been creating a society according to a male pattern. The man has become the center, the woman has been thrown off center. It is lopsided. Now there are women who think of creating a society according to a woman’s pattern, where man has to be thrown out of the center. That too will be lopsided. God is both male and female; there is no choice. Male and female are opposites: dark and light, life and death. Opposites are there. A hidden harmony has to be sought. Those who come to know the hidden harmony have realized the truth.
God is day and night, winter and summer,
war and peace, satiety and want.

Seawater is at once very pure and very foul:
it is drinkable and healthful for fishes,
but undrinkable and deadly for men.
Everything is good and everything is bad – it depends. War is good sometimes, peace is bad sometimes – it depends. Sometimes peace is nothing but impotence, then it is not good; it may be peace, but it is not good. Sometimes war is nothing but madness, then it is not good. One has to watch and see, without any prejudice. Not every war is bad and not every peace is good; one should not become addicted. For Nietzsche, every war is good; for Gandhi, all times of peace are good – both are addicted. God is both.
Heraclitus says: Seawater is at once very pure and very foul… For fish it is life; for you it can be death. So don’t create absolute ideas, remain flexible. Remember, something may be good for you today and not good tomorrow because life goes on changing and you cannot step in the same river twice. Even if you do, you are not the same and yet you are the same. Everything is moving, a flux, so don’t remain fixed. This is one of the diseases of the human mind; you become fixed, you lose flexibility – and flexibility is life.
Look at a child, he is flexible; look at an old man, he has become inflexible. The more flexible you are, the more alive and fresh and young. The more inflexible you become, you are dead already. What is flexibility? ? it is to respond to the moment without any preconceived idea; to respond to the moment, not through any preconceived idea – directly, immediately. Immediacy is flexibility. You look at the situation, you become aware, and sensitive to it – and then you act. The action comes through the encounter of the situation and you, not from a past mind.
The nature of day and night is one.
War and peace are one; and desire and desirelessness are one. The phenomenon is the same: peace is war inactive; war is peace active. The nature of man and woman is one: woman is inactive, passive man; man is active woman. That’s why they attract each other, because if you take them just in themselves, they are halves. If they become one then the whole is created; both meet and become one. That oneness is the search.
If you take them apart, as all the religions have done in the past – Catholics, Jainas, Buddhists, have totally separated men and women. All these religions have remained halfhearted; they cannot be total, they cannot accept the whole. Their circle is half, and half a circle is not a circle at all because a circle, to be a circle, must be the whole – half a circle is no circle. That’s why the whole of Christianity turned out to be ugly, Jainism turned out to be ugly, Buddhism turned out to be ugly. You cannot divide, you have to accept the totality.
Beauty is of the total and ugliness is of a torn part. Everything total is beautiful, fulfilled – the circle has become complete. The nature of day and night is one. The day itself becomes the night, the night itself turns into day. Can you find the divide between day and night? Can you make a demarcation? There is no demarcation – by and by, day turns into night; night turns into day. It is one wheel. If you see all opposites as a wheel, you will have transcendence. You will no longer be a man and no longer be a woman because many times you turn into a woman and a woman turns into a man. If you watch yourself for twenty-four hours, you can find at which moment you were a woman and at which moment you were a man; you can find when you are passive, when you are active. When you are passive you are a woman, when you are active you are a man – and both are hidden within you.
Now psychology accepts that man is bisexual; every man is woman also, and every woman is also man. The difference is only of quantity, degrees, not of quality. If you are a man that means you may be fifty-one percent man and forty-nine percent woman – that is the difference. That’s why it is possible for you to change your sex; it is a difference of degrees. Just a little hormonal change and the sex will change. No need to even change the hormones; if you simply change your psyche the change will come. It happened to Ramakrishna. He tried many paths to reach the divine. Even when he had reached, he still went on trying every path just to see whether every path leads to him.
There is a very beautiful path in India; that path is to conceive God as the only male and you become the female, the beloved. Whether you are a man or a woman is not the point. God is the male and you are the female; God is Krishna and everyone is just a beloved. Those who follow this path start behaving like women. They cannot use male clothes, they have to use feminine ones; they sleep with a statue of Krishna. They completely forget whether they are male or female; whatever they are, they become female. Every fourth week, for five days, they act as if their period has come. In the beginning it is just acting but, by and by, changes start happening.
It happened to Ramakrishna; he completely became a woman. It has remained a mystery. How is it possible? Menstruation really started! He would bleed for three or four days every month. His breasts became feminine, they grew; his voice changed, it became feminine; he started walking like a woman. He was on that path for six months – he completely became a woman. And this is a mystery because doctors are the witnesses that he started bleeding – the period would come. Just the mind changed the whole body. After he reached through that path and left it, he started trying something else. Even after that, the body remained the same for one year. It took one year to come back, to become a man again.
Inside you are both; it is just a question of emphasis. Heraclitus came to realize this:
The nature of day and night is one.

The way up and the way down
are one and the same.
Heaven and hell are one, God and the Devil are one because it has to be so: two poles of the same phenomenon.
Even sleepers are workers and collaborators
in what goes on in the universe.
Even sleepers are responsible. What does Heraclitus want to say? ? he is saying that responsibility is not individual, karma is not individual; it is total. This is a rare insight. I absolutely agree with him. This is a rare insight because in India they have believed that karma is individual – that is also clinging to the ego. Why? When there is no ego, and you insist that there is no ego, why should karma be individual? If karma is individual, you cannot leave the ego. In fact it will cling in a subtle way: “I have to fulfill my karma and you have to fulfill your karma.” Where do we meet? I will become enlightened, you will remain ignorant. Where do we meet?
If Heraclitus’ insight is to be understood, it means that there are no individuals, no islands; man is not an island, we are part of one whole. Even karma is not individual. That has many implications; a vast dimension opens. That means that if someone somewhere murders, I have a part in it. Even if I am asleep – I was sleeping, I don’t know anything about the man, I have never heard of him – and somebody somewhere, in the Himalayas, commits a murder, if we are not individuals I have a part in it, I am also responsible. It is not so easy to throw the responsibility: “I am not committing a murder, I am a saint.”
No saint is a saint because every sinner is implied in him. It is foolish to claim: “I am a saint because I am not committing any murder, robbery, sin.” But there are sinners in the world, and if we are one part, one vast continent, not islands but connected, then how can you commit a sin without me? No, it is not possible. How can I become enlightened without you also becoming enlightened? No, that is not possible. It means that whenever a sin is committed, the whole is involved. Whenever there is a phenomenon like enlightenment, the whole is involved.
That’s why whenever a man becomes enlightened, immediately many follow in his wake and become enlightened because he creates a possibility for the whole. It is just like this: if my head aches, it is not only the head that is ill, my whole organism becomes ill – my legs, my heart, my hand also feels it because I am one. It may be focused in the head, that’s okay, but the whole body feels ill. A buddha becomes enlightened – it is focused there, that’s all, because no individual is there. It is just a focusing, but he will vibrate all over. Existence is just like a spider’s web. You touch the web from anywhere and the whole vibrates. Somewhere the touch is focused, that’s right, but the whole vibrates. That’s the meaning, and you have to understand it. Whenever you do something, it is not only you who is involved – the whole is involved. Your responsibility is great. It is not only that you have to be finished with your own karma; the whole history of the world is your biography.
Even while asleep I am collaborating, cooperating, so each step has to be very, very responsible and alert. If you commit a sin it is the whole that you drag into the sin, not only you because you are not separate. If you meditate, become aware, and feel blissful, it is the whole that you are taking toward a peak. You may be focused, but the whole is always involved.
Remember, whatever you do, God is doing it; whatever you are, God is that; whatever you will become, God will be becoming. You are not alone, you are the destiny of the whole.
Even sleepers are workers and collaborators
in what goes on in the universe.

In the circle
the beginning and the end are common.
If you make a circle, the end and beginning meet – only then is the circle complete. If you become a circle, whole, total, you will meet the beginning and the end. You will be the very source and the very climax of the world. You will be both the alpha and the omega. Unless you become that, something is incomplete; when something is incomplete you will remain miserable. The only misery that I know is being incomplete. The whole being tends toward being complete, needs to be complete; the incomplete becomes a torture. The incompletion is the only problem. When you become complete, the end and the beginning meet in you. God as the source and God as the ultimate flowering meet in you.
Ponder over these small fragments. Each fragment can become a vast contemplation, and each fragment can give you an insight into yourself and into the reality. These are not philosophical statements, these are Heraclitus’ insights – he knows, he has come to see. He is not theorizing; he has touched the reality, penetrated it. Each fragment is complete in itself, it is not a system. These fragments are like gems, individually cut; every gem is complete in itself. You simply penetrate one fragment, and through that one fragment you can become totally different – that one fragment can become the door for the infinite.
Meditate, ponder over what Heraclitus is saying. He can have a tremendous impact on you. He can become a transformation for you.
Enough for today.

============================================================

Let us not make arbitrary conjectures
about the greatest matters.

Much learning does not teach understanding.

Seekers after gold
dig up much earth and find little.

You could not discover the limits of the soul
even if you traveled every road to do so –
such is the depth of its meaning.
The whole of philosophy is nothing but arbitrary conjectures; if you want to avoid real knowledge, if you want to avoid the existential, there is nothing like philosophy. Escape into philosophy and you can avoid all, all that creates problems. Philosophy is a cheap solution. You simply theorize ? without entering, without encountering reality. And theories are nothing but words, arguments, rationalizations; explanations are nothing but tricks. Nothing is solved because you remain the same.
A philosopher is the most deceived person in the world because he thinks he knows without knowing anything at all. Heraclitus has laughed about Pythagoras, one of the greatest philosophers the world has ever known. Many times Heraclitus says, “If by philosophizing someone could become a knower, Pythagoras would have been the first knower in the world.” Pythagoras traveled all over the known world in those days. He even came to India; he lived in Egypt, he traveled far and wide; he collected much knowledge.
Pythagoras was a contemporary of Heraclitus and he is more known than him. Pythagoras is a milestone in the history of philosophy. He collected and knew much, but without knowing anything at all. What did he do? ? he gathered knowledge through scriptures, teachers, schools, ashrams, secret societies. When you gather knowledge it becomes part of your memory; you remain unaffected. Your heart is not touched, your being is not even aware of what you have collected in your memory. Unless your being is touched and transformed, knowledge is ignorance and more dangerous than ordinary ignorance – because an ordinary ignorant person knows that he is ignorant, and a philosopher thinks that he knows. Once you become addicted to knowledge you will think that your knowledge is knowing. Of course, you know so much, but deep down nothing has been known, nothing has changed; you have not evolved to a higher plane of being. Real knowledge consists in attaining higher levels of being, higher planes of being – not more knowledge, but more being.
The real way is to be more, not to know more.
The false way is to know more, not to be more. Philosophers talk about things. They don’t even have a glimpse of God, moksha, liberation, other worlds, heaven and hell. Not only do they talk about it, they talk very authoritatively – but they cannot deceive. They are deceiving nobody except themselves.

It is said that one day, while Mulla Nasruddin was walking through a cemetery, he found a grave of the philosopher of the town who had died just a few days before. On the grave it was written: “I am sleeping, I am not dead.”
Mulla laughed out loud and said, “You are deceiving yourself and nobody else!”

A philosopher continuously deceives himself. Instead of knowing he depends on information. When knowledge is attained existentially, it is authentic. For example, you can collect much knowledge about love without ever falling in love. Libraries are filled with such knowledge; you can go there and collect all that has ever been said about love ? but about love is not love, about God is not God. About love means that you go round and round, round and round, never penetrating the center. To love is totally different.
You can theorize about what love is, you can conclude about the nature of love, but if you have not fallen in love, what use is this knowledge? What do you gain out of it? What will you find through it? A deception is possible. Knowing about love, you may start believing that you know love, and if this happens you have closed the door to falling in love. To fall in love is dangerous. To know about love is clever and cunning. To fall in love means to change yourself; to fall in love means to encounter millions of difficulties because to interact with a living person is to move into the unknown. Nobody knows what is going to happen in the next moment. You are thrown out of your enclosure, you are under the open sky and every moment there will be new problems to be solved, new anxieties to be got over. It has to be so because problems and anxieties are the steps. If you take those steps, you grow; if you become afraid and escape, you remain juvenile.
Love is an opportunity to grow, but growth is always painful because something has to be destroyed before you can create something. The past has to be destroyed before a new future is born. Every growth is like the pain a mother goes through when she gives birth to a child. Every growth means you are continuously giving birth to yourself; every moment the child is born. It is a continuous process, never ending; there is no stop to it. You can rest for a while, but the journey is endless. You have to give birth continuously to yourself, and every moment there will be pain. But if you can see that out of pain comes a new life, if you accept it ? not only accept but welcome it ? it is beautiful because it is through it that one grows. There is no other way to grow.
Love will give you pain, love will make you suffer, because through love one grows. There has never been any growth without suffering. That is the meaning of the cross: Jesus suffers, and suffers totally. When he suffers totally he is reborn totally, resurrected. He is no longer a man, he becomes a god. He loved humanity so deeply that the love toward humanity became the cross.
If you are afraid to love a single individual, how will you grow? You can trick your mind – you can go to the libraries, collect information about love and lovers; you can know much without knowing anything at all. And this happens in every dimension of life. This is how you deceive whenever great matters are concerned. To pray is difficult; to become a priest is easy. A priest is a man who has collected all the knowledge about prayer. But to pray is difficult; it is like death – because unless you die how can you invite the divine to enter you? Unless you become empty, how can he come into you?
Søren Kierkegaard has said, “In the beginning, when I started to pray, I used to talk a lot to God. By and by, I came to understand the foolishness of what I was doing. I was talking – how can talking be prayer? Prayer can be only a deep listening, not a talking. You have to be silent so God can be heard. You have to be so silent that the silent and still word of God can penetrate you. In that silence the divine is revealed.” Prayer is not talking, it is a listening – alert, passive, open, ready, ready like a womb. Prayer is feminine and a priest is a male phenomenon. A priest is aggressive; he is doing something. Prayer is not a doing at all – it is simply being receptive, it is simply being open. A door is open and you are waiting. It is infinite patience and waiting. A priest is aggressive. Priesthood is an art, you can learn it. Prayer is not an art, you cannot learn it anywhere. You can learn it only in life. No school, no university exists that can teach you prayer – only life.
You move in life and you suffer; by and by you grow and feel your total helplessness. By and by you feel that all egoistic claims are foolish – because who are you? Being tossed from there to here, from here to there; just drifting, drifting wood on the sea ? who are you? When you feel, “I am nobody,” the first seed of prayer has entered you. When you feel that you are helpless, and cannot do anything because you have been doing and doing for so long and nothing happens except misery ? that nothing happens through your effort ? you become effortless. In that moment of helplessness the prayer takes a second step. Not that in your helplessness you start demanding from God: “Do this for me because I cannot do it” – no! If you are really helpless you cannot even demand and desire because you come to realize that whatever you say will be wrong, whatever you ask will be wrong. You realize that you are wrong so all that comes through you will go wrong. Then you will say, “Thy will be done… Don’t listen to me, just do whatever you would like to do, and I am ready to follow.” This is prayer – but not priesthood.
You can be trained as a priest; there are colleges which train priests. Every gesture of prayer is taught: how to sit, how to bow down, what words to use and what words not to use.

Leo Tolstoy has written a small parable. A man came to a priest, the greatest priest in Russia, and said, “I know three saints. They live on an island and they have attained God.”
The priest replied, “How can that happen? I am the high priest of the whole country. Without knowing me, without my knowing of the phenomenon, how is it possible that three people have attained God? I will go and see them.”
He went in a boat and reached the island. Those three simple people were sitting under a tree and saying their prayers. He listened to their prayer, laughed loudly and said, “You fools! Where have you learned this prayer? Even in my life I have never heard such nonsense, and I am the greatest priest of this country. What type of prayer is this?”
All three started trembling in fear and said, “Forgive us! We didn’t know, we have never learned. We have created this prayer ourselves.” The prayer was simple. They said, “We are three” – and Christians believe in the trinity, so they said – “We have made a prayer: ‘We are three, you are also three, have mercy on us!’ We have made it ourselves: ‘We are three, you are three have mercy on us!’ We do this continuously, but we don’t know whether this is right or wrong.”
The priest said, “This is absolutely wrong. I will teach you the correct, authorized version.” It was a long prayer of the church. Those three people listened, trembling. The priest was very happy. He went back thinking that he had done a virtuous deed, really good work; he had converted three pagans to Christianity. “These fools! They have become famous. Many people come to their darshan, touch their feet and worship them!”
As he was returning, feeling very happy that he had done something, suddenly he saw what looked like a storm coming on the lake. He became afraid. Then he looked back; those three saints were coming toward him, running on the water. He couldn’t believe his eyes. The three saints came to him and said, “Can you tell us the prayer once more please because we have forgotten it! It is so long and we are simple folk, uneducated. Just once more?”
Leo Tolstoy writes that it is said the priest fell at their feet and said, “Forgive me! I have committed a sin. You go on in your own way. Your prayer is right because it has come out of your heart. My prayer is useless because it has come out of my learning. Don’t listen to me. Simply go and carry on doing whatever you were doing.”

Prayer cannot be learned. You have to pass through life with open eyes, with an understanding heart, and you will come to prayer. The prayer will be yours. It will come out of your heart, it will pour out of your heart. Words don’t mean much – it is the heart that is behind them. You can learn much through the mind, and can completely forget the heart because the heart grows through experience, and the mind grows through thinking. And thinking is just dead. There is no growth through thinking. You can go round and round in the mind. The mind is just a computer, a biological computer; it collects information. A computer can do the same as the mind, even better. But the heart is not a computer. The heart is totally different from the mind. It doesn’t collect, it has no memory. It simply lives moment to moment; it responds to the alive moment in an alive way.

I knew a person, a colleague of mine at a university. He was ill and there was always something or other wrong with him. So I said to him, “Why don’t you go to a doctor? Why don’t you ask a doctor about the problems with your body? You are always complaining about this and that.” So he went.
The next day he came to see me and said, “The doctor says that I will have to give up half my sexual life.”
I was surprised and said, “So what have you decided?”
He said, “Yes, I have to follow his advice.”
I asked, “Which half – talking or thinking?”

I knew the man, he had no sexual life, but talked and thought about it. There are people who have no religious life. They talk and they think about it, but they have no religious life. If you listen to their talk, you may feel that they are religious. Religion is not something concerned with thinking and talking – religion is something concerned with living. Either you live it or you don’t. It is a way of life, not a philosophy; not theories about great matters, but a deep relatedness with whatever life means.
Watch your mind, how it exploits opportunities when you could have become religious. You see a flower and you start thinking about it, you start talking about it – you don’t live the moment. The flower is there opening its petals – a tremendously beautiful phenomenon, a miracle.
Scientists say that life is a miracle; there is no reason why it should be. Of millions and millions of planets and stars, life has existed only on this small tiny earth, and that, too, only for a few thousand years. Nobody knows why, nobody knows how long it will exist; nobody knows the goal, the destiny of it, the source. At the most, scientists say that this is simply a miracle, an accident. Nothing can be said. A flower is a miracle because a flower is alive. In this dead universe – millions of planets, millions of stars, just rocks and rocks and rocks, infinitely rocky – a small seed has become a plant and the plant is celebrating. A flower has come up and you simply start thinking, talking about it. You say, “How beautiful!” and you miss the beauty because if it is really beautiful you will become silent. Whenever you encounter something tremendous you are in such a mysterious amazement and wonder, how can you speak? It’s profane. In that moment, speaking is just foolish – you are missing.
You simply remain silent, you drink, you eat the moment; you allow the flower to spread within you. In a subtle way the duality of subject and object is lost. You are no longer the subject and the flower is no longer the object; the boundaries meet and melt. Suddenly, the flower is within you and you are in the flower because life is one. You are also a flower; consciousness is a flowering. That’s why Hindus have always symbolized it as a lotus; a flowering of a flower. A flower is also a consciousness, alive. Meet the flower, don’t start talking and thinking. Now you know what a flower is. You may not be able to say what you know, you may not be able to create a theory about your knowing. It is difficult – when you know, it is very difficult to create a theory around it. It is so vast, experience is so vast, and theories look so narrow. You may not be able to philosophize, but that is not the point – you know, that is the point.
This point is the crossroads where philosophers and religious people separate from each other. Philosophers go on talking and thinking, and religious people go on deepening their experience – a moment comes when they are completely lost. A philosopher finally becomes just an ego, and a religious person is simply lost. You cannot find where he is. If you understand this, these fragments will become very, very meaningful – they are.
Let us not make arbitrary conjectures
about the greatest matters.
What can your mind do? Such a small and tiny thing.

It is said that one day Aristotle was walking on the beach near the sea, and saw a man who was bringing water from the sea in a teaspoon and throwing it in a small hole he had dug near the bank. Aristotle was worried about his own problems. He didn’t bother much about it – once or twice, he came near and watched the man. But the man was so absorbed that Aristotle became curious: “What is he doing?” He could not contain himself; the man was absolutely absorbed. He would go to the sea, fill his teaspoon, bring the water, put it in the hole, and go again. Finally Aristotle said, “Wait! I don’t want to disturb you, but what are you doing? You have made me tremendously curious.”
The man replied, “I am going to fill this hole with the whole ocean.”
Aristotle, even Aristotle, laughed and said, “You’re foolish! This is not going to happen. You are simply mad and wasting your life! Just look at the vastness of the ocean and the smallness of your hole. And you are going to empty the ocean into this hole with a teaspoon? You are simply crazy! Go home and take a rest.”
The man laughed even louder than Aristotle and said, “Yes, I’ll go because my work is done.”
Aristotle said, “What do you mean?”
He replied, “The same as you’re doing – even more foolish. Look at your head; it is smaller than my hole. Look at the divine, at existence; it is vaster than this ocean. Look at your thoughts – are they bigger than my teaspoon?” The man left, laughing loudly. It shocked Aristotle.

Nobody knows whether this happened or not because Aristotle remained the same. I suspect that this story may have been invented by Heraclitus. Or it is even possible that this man may have been Heraclitus – I suspect that too.
What can the mind do? When you think of it, it just looks absurd. How can you understand such a vastness through the head? The whole effort seems to be futile. Drop the head and then look! You are also vast when you don’t look through the head. It is only because you are looking through the head that you have become small. It is only because of the narrowness of the head that you are also narrow. Throw this head away! Just look at existence without the head. That means, without thinking, being fully alert with not a single thought in the mind. Not theorizing, but living.
Let us not make arbitrary conjectures… Our conjectures are all arbitrary. What can you say? Somebody asks, “Is there God?” What will you say? If you say yes, that too is a conjecture – have you known? If you say no, that too is a conjecture – have you known? How can you say anything? If you say yes, you are wrong. If you say no, you are wrong.
That’s why buddhas have remained silent. If you ask Buddha about God he doesn’t say anything. He simply remains silent, as if you have not asked anything. He never says a single word about God. He knows the stupidity of the question. He knows that if you answer a stupid question, you also are stupid. He remains absolutely silent, neither saying yes or no because all are conjectures. What can you say? Christian theologians look foolish before a buddha. They even try to prove, they even give proof that God is. They give logical grounds that God is. But does God need logical support from you? Does the whole need any proof from you? Are you the judge? What can you prove? Whatever you prove can be disproved by the same mind because logic is a double-edged sword – you can prove, you can disprove. Logic is not a beloved. Logic is a prostitute. Whoever pays, logic works for him.

I knew a man – he was a lawyer, a very great, world famous authority on law, but a very forgetful man, very absent minded. It happened once in a Privy Council case in London where he was fighting the case for an Indian maharaja. It was a big case. He forgot – and for one hour he argued against his own client. Even the judge became worried. The advocate of the opposite party couldn’t believe what was happening: “Now what am I going to do?” Because this man was making all the arguments that he had prepared. The whole thing was topsy-turvy, and the whole court couldn’t believe what was happening.
The man was such an authority that nobody dared to interrupt him; even his own assistant tried many times to get his attention by pulling his coat to tell him what he was doing. When he finished his assistant whispered in his ear, “What have you done? You have completely destroyed the case. We are not against this man – we are for him!”
This lawyer said to the judge, “My lord, these are the arguments which can be given against my client. Now I will contradict them.” And he started contradicting, and he won the case.

Logic is a prostitute. You can argue for God, and the same argument can be used against God. For example, all the religions of the world, all the priests, bishops, popes, theologians, have used as their basic proof, as the first proof in their argument for God, that everything needs a creator: “If you see furniture, you know that some carpenter has made it. If you see a painting, some painter is bound to have painted it. How can a painting exist without a painter? Such a vast creation, running so systematically, following such a disciplined course, needs a creator. Creation presupposes a creator.”
Now, listen to the atheist. He says: “If this is true, who created the creator? Because if nothing can be without a creator, if the painting cannot be without the painter, who created the painter? If you say that the painter is uncreated, you are foolish because if the painting – such a small thing like a painting – cannot be without a creator, how can the painter be without a creator?”
Your own logic goes against you. And if you say, “Yes, God is created by another God,” there is an infinite regress ? again, again and again. A-God is created by B-God; B-God is created by C-God – and it is infinite. Finally the question will remain the same; it has not been answered. Who created the Z-God? The same question remains. Logic answers nothing. The same argument can go for, and the same can go against.
Heraclitus says: Let us not make arbitrary conjectures – don’t make any conjectures, all theories are conjectures – about the greatest matters. It is better not to make any conjecture.
Much learning does not teach understanding.
You can learn much about these conjectures, which are all arbitrary, and you can become a great pundit, you can become a great knower. In the first place all are conjectures, in the second place you accumulate all that rubbish and you become a great scholar. People will respect you and will think that you know – but do you know? Talking about God, proving for or against, do you come to any conclusion?

It is said that Mulla Nasruddin used to work as a ferryman; he used to run a ferryboat. One day he was ferrying a priest to the other shore, who, just in the middle, asked Nasruddin, “Have you ever learned anything, Nasruddin?”
He replied, “I am ignorant, I don’t know anything. I have never been to school.”
The priest said, “Then half your life is almost wasted because what is a man without learning?”
Nasruddin didn’t say anything. A storm arose and the boat was sinking and he said to the priest, “Oh, great pundit, have you ever learned to swim?”
The man replied, “No, never, I don’t know how.”
The Mulla said, “Then your whole life is wasted because I’m going!”

Learning cannot become swimming. And existence needs experience. Learning cannot become knowing. Knowing is something you have experienced and have come to know. Knowing is always original, learning is always borrowed. Others may have known, may not have known; you cannot decide – you simply believe. Remember, belief won’t help; it is part of learning. Trust, faith, is totally different. You have tasted something, trust comes. When you haven’t tasted, trust isn’t there, there is only a superficially enforced belief. You believe; belief is borrowed, dead. The more you believe, the more dead you will become. Trust is totally different. It is not belief, it is not disbelief. It has nothing to do with belief or disbelief or with the mind. People say, “We believe in God.” There are people who say, “We don’t believe.”

A man came to Sri Aurobindo and asked, “Do you believe in God?”
Sri Aurobindo replied, “No.”
The man couldn’t believe his own ears because he had come from a very, very faraway country to ask this question, and he thought that Aurobindo must believe in God – and he says, “No.”
The man said, “What are you saying? I cannot believe my own ears and I have come from so far just to listen to a man who knows.”
Aurobindo replied, “But I have not said anything about knowing. I don’t believe, I know.”

Belief is a poor substitute for knowing, really no substitute at all. You don’t believe in the sun – you know. I am here; you don’t believe in me, you know. You are sitting there; you don’t believe that you are there, you know. You believe in God, you don’t know.
Ignorance can either become belief or can become disbelief, but ignorance remains ignorance. Knowing is needed. And know one subtle distinction: I don’t use the word knowledge, I use the word knowing because knowing is a process, knowledge is already ended. Knowledge is like a thing – finished. You can possess it, it is in your fist; you can manipulate it, it is complete. Knowing is a process, a river; it goes on and on and on. You can never possess it; you cannot say that it is finished. Existence is eternal, how can knowing be finished? How can you come to a point where you can say, “Now I have known all”? Such a point never comes.
The more you know, the more doors open. The more you flow, the more mysteries are ready to be revealed to you. The more you know, the more you become capable of knowing – and there is no end to it. That’s why I use the word knowing, not knowledge. Knowledge is a dead thing, it is past, already gone to the grave. Knowing is always in the present; it is ongoing, it is river-like. Heraclitus will agree with me. He will agree with knowing ? knowledge, no.
Knowledge is a finished product, knowing is raw. It is always in the making, it is always becoming. It is always changing, flowing, taking new shapes, forms, and you cannot finish it because you are part of it. Who can finish it? You can become knowing, but you can never become a knower.
The same is true of love, prayer, meditation, and of all great matters. In fact, to use the word love is not good – loving gives the sense of process. To use the word prayer is not good, prayer is dead – praying gives the sense of a flow, of movement, of aliveness. Experience is not good – experiencing. Meditation is not good; language always gives the sense of dead things, and life is not dead. Even if you go to the river and say, “The river is,” even for the river you say “is” – the river is never “is.” The river is always moving, becoming.
Nothing is, everything flows. Everything takes new shapes, forms, names, and everything flows one into another. Experiencing, knowing, loving, praying, meditating – remember, life is a process, it is not a thing. It is a movement from one eternity to another. It is always in the middle; you are always in the middle. It is a never ending, alive movement.
Learning can give you dead products, only life can give you processes. You cannot possess anything in life, you cannot even possess yourself. If you have a possessive mind you will become a knower; hence the insistence on nonpossessiveness, on a nonpossessive mind. Don’t possess anything. Don’t possess even your child, he is not a thing. Don’t possess your beloved, she is not a thing. Don’t possess anything – you cannot! If you possess, you will kill, destroy. The same happens with learning; we want to possess.
People come to me and say, “We would like to know God.” But why would you like to know God? ? you want to become a knower; you would also like to possess him. You would like to put him on display, to show that not only do you possess furniture, a car and a house, but also God: “It is here, you can come and see. I have caught hold of him.” You would also like to make God a commodity – you have made it already.
No, you cannot possess. Knowing cannot be possessed. Learning can be possessed. Knowing cannot be taught, you have to grow into it. It is not secure because who can be secure with a process? It is never safe; who can be safe with a process? There is security only with dead things. It is always dangerous because you are always moving from the known to the unknown, from the light to the dark, from the day to the night. You are always moving from life to death. If you can find the secret hidden harmony that transcends both, moves within both and yet transcends both, you have come to know the truth.
That is what Heraclitus means about the greatest matters: Much learning does not teach understanding. Have you seen people who know so much, but act in a foolish way? It almost always happens: a man who knows too much becomes less and less aware. He acts through his knowledge, not through the real situation. He becomes foolish, he behaves in a foolish way because to behave in a wise way needs response, and he always acts from the dead past. He always acts from a readiness, preparedness. He is never unprepared.
I have heard…

A great professor of philosophy was studying in his room. His wife came to him, very, very excited, and said, “What are you doing? Have you seen the newspaper? It says that you have died!”
The professor, without even looking at the wife or the newspaper, said, “We shouldn’t forget to send flowers” – because whenever someone dies, flowers have to be sent – that’s all. He hadn’t listened.

You cannot surprise a man of knowledge, no. He already knows. You cannot amaze him, he has lost that dimension of wonder. He is no longer a child; he knows, he knows everything.
I have heard…

I cannot vouch for it because I have only heard – a friend was telling me that he was sitting with Mulla Nasruddin and they were talking about many things and enjoying themselves. Suddenly Mulla Nasruddin’s dog came in and said, “Has anyone seen today’s newspaper?” The friend was simply shocked, he couldn’t believe it!
Mulla gave the dog the newspaper, and when the dog left the friend collected his wits again and said, “It is a miracle – this dog reads?”
Mulla replied, “Don’t be fooled by him. He simply looks at the cartoons.”

There are people who have no sense of wonder and mystery. They cannot be amazed, you cannot surprise them. What happens? ? they’re always ready. They know, and when you know, how can you wonder? A child wonders. And that is the meaning of Jesus’ saying: “Unless you become like children, you will not enter my kingdom of God.” Why? – because wonder is the door and only an innocent heart wonders. If you can get an innocent heart, you wonder; everything gives you a surprise. A butterfly ? it is such a mystery!
Chuang Tzu was sitting under a tree and two or three butterflies were chasing each other. He wrote a small poem and said: “It seems to me that these butterflies are flowers – the flowers that once fell to the ground have come back, and now are back on the tree.” Flowers fall to the ground and disappear. Chuang Tzu says, “They have come now as butterflies back to the tree.” This man will enter the kingdom of God, not you. If somebody asks anything about a butterfly, you will immediately open a book and you can repeat everything that is written there about the butterfly, but do you think all that can be said is the total? And all that has been said, has all been said in it? Is there not something which has remained unsaid and which will remain always unsaid and which will never be possible for anybody to say? If you think that nothing remains unsaid, how can you be amazed? You have lost the sense of wonder.
This century knows more than any other century, and this century is further away from God than any other century ever was – piled up knowledge, libraries that go on growing bigger and bigger, and everybody knows so much. Even small children, we force them to know – not toward knowing, not that their wonder should grow, that they should become more and more mysterious; that they should feel the mystery more inside, outside; that they should be touched by flowers and butterflies and stones. No. We fill their minds with knowledge.
Heraclitus says:
Seekers after gold
dig up much earth and find little.
These knowers, pundits, dig up much earth, but find little. They remove a whole mountain and a mouse comes out. What do they attain? They are like diggers after gold; so much effort, and whatever they achieve simply seems valuable. That’s why he uses the word gold because what value does gold have? In fact, what value? The value that you give to it is just a convention. It is we who give gold value, it is not the gold which has an intrinsic value. If man were not here, do you think there would be any value to gold? Animals don’t bother, birds don’t think about it. If you put gold before a dog, and a bone, he will choose the bone; he doesn’t bother about your gold. What value has gold? Has it any intrinsic value? ? no value, just the social projection. If you think it valuable, it becomes valuable. Whatever you think is valuable, becomes valuable. Diggers searching for gold dig up much earth and find little. This is what happens to those who are digging for knowledge, not experience; digging for truth, not for life ? and life is truth! And whatever truth you can dig out of theories and knowledge is dead.
You could not discover the limits of the soul
even if you traveled every road to do so –
such is the depth of its meaning.
Try to understand three words. One word is the known, that which we already know; another word is, the unknown, that which we don’t know yet, but there is every possibility we will know. Science divides existence into these two words: the known and the unknown. The known we have known, and the unknown we will know; just time is needed. Religion divides this world into three words, not two: the known, the unknown and the unknowable.
You cannot exhaust the unknowable. The unknown will become known, the known may become again unknown. It has happened many times. Many things have been known and then they became unknown because society became uninterested in them. Many times it has happened. If you go back and ask people who work deeply into the past, they say almost all that we know has been known some time before and then forgotten.
Columbus was not the first man to discover America; many people before him discovered it, and America was lost again. In the Mahabharata, one of the oldest Indian scriptures – at least five thousand years old, more is possible – there is mention of Mexico. Arjuna had many wives, one was a Mexican. In many other scriptures of the world America is mentioned. Columbus was not the first to discover it – he rediscovered it. There is mention of airplanes in many scriptures of the world; this is not the first time that we have discovered the airplane. We discovered it and we became uninterested in it; it was lost. I haven’t come to know anything that has been discovered for the first time. Everything has been discovered and lost. It depends on the society; if the society takes an interest, it is okay; otherwise it is lost.
The known will become unknown, the unknown will become known. But there is a third dimension: the unknowable. Science doesn’t believe in the unknowable. Science says, “The unknowable is nothing but the unknown.” Religion says, “It is a totally different dimension, and that which will always remain unknown” – because its intrinsic nature is such that the mind cannot cope with it. The vast, the infinite, the endless, the beginningless, the total – the total cannot be comprehended in any way by the part because how can the part comprehend the total? How can the mind comprehend that from which the mind arises? How can the mind know that to which the mind goes back? It is impossible! It is simply impossible. How can we know that from which we come? We are just like waves and how can a wave comprehend the whole ocean? It can claim because the ocean never refutes anything – it simply laughs. It is just like a child claiming something before the parents, and they laugh. The incomprehensible is there – the unknowable is there.
Heraclitus says: You could not discover the limits of the soul even if you traveled every road to do so – such is the depth of its meaning. How can you know yourself? Every religion says: “Know thyself!” But how can you really know yourself? Who will be the knower and who will be the known? Because knowledge depends on a division. I can know you, you can know me because I become an object and you become the knower – but how can you know yourself? If you try to know, that which you will know will not be yourself. The knower will always recede; knowledge will always be bracketed as an object and you will be bracketed as a subject.
For example, you can know about the body. That’s why all knowers have said that you are not the body – because we can know it. You can know the mind. That is why those who know say, “You are not the mind” – because the mind becomes the object and you are the knower. You recede, and go on receding; you are a subtle transcendence. You transcend whatever you know, immediately. The moment it has become known you are separate from it. If you say, “I have known myself,” what do you mean? Who has known whom? Is this the known you or the knower you? If you are the knower, you still remain unknown. Self-knowledge is impossible.
But why has “Know thyself” always been said? It has been said because only through the effort to know oneself will you come to the dimension of the unknowable. It has been insisted: “Know thyself.” Not that you can know, don’t be deceived. Nobody has ever known, nobody will ever know. All those who have known knew this – that the great, the vast, the ultimate, remains unknowable.
The insistence is there: “Know thyself!” I also insist: “Know thyself!” Just to bring you to a point where you suddenly become aware that this is the gate for the unknowable. Just by making the effort to know yourself you will come to know the unknowable. And I don’t mean when I say that you will come to know the unknowable that you will know it. No! You will enter it. It is never a knowledge, it is a jump. You take a jump into the sea and you are lost. Not that you know it – you become it. Of course, in a very, very subtle way you know, and at the same time you don’t know.
That’s why Heraclitus looks paradoxical, looks defective, looks a little mad. But such is the nature of things, such is the depth of things, such is the deeper meaning of things. Nothing can be done. Hence, it happens that if you move into the unknowable without getting ready to take it, you can become mad. It is such a paradox that you cannot make head nor tail of it. It is such a depth that you never come to the bottom of it. It is such an infinity that the more you enter it the more you are lost. You can never possess it, you can only be possessed.
God cannot be possessed, you can only allow him to possess you. That’s all that can be done. That’s why it is a surrender. You allow him to possess, you are ready to be possessed. And for this readiness you have to be ready to lose your rationality, reason, because it is sheer madness. Nothing is clear, everything becomes confused and blurred. It looks blurred and confused because you have been trying to make clarity out of it. It is not possible. Life comprehends all that is paradoxical. You could not discover the limits of the soul even if you traveled every road to do so – such is the depth of its meaning.
You can travel all the paths, but you will never reach the goal. All the paths combine and you will never reach the goal. Why? – because life has no goal. It is a celebration. It has no purpose, it is not going anywhere. It is simply enjoying the going, not going anywhere. It is a play, it is a game. Don’t be serious about it, otherwise you will miss it. Be sincere, but not serious. Sincerity is something else, seriousness is something else. If you are serious you are thinking in terms of goals, means and ends, ways and achievement; you are ambitious. Seriousness is ambition and a disease. You may have turned your attention from this world, but your ambitious mind is now thinking about the other. Seriousness is not religious. A serious man will automatically become a philosophic man; he will start thinking. Seriousness is of the head. That’s why a serious person, a thinker, becomes a long face. He cannot even laugh, smile, or play because he is always thinking: “What is to be achieved through it?” He turns life into a means, when life itself is the goal.
A sincere person is totally different. Sincerity is of the heart. He is true, but not serious. He is seeking, but not as a goal. He is seeking it just like a child seeks things; if he finds it, okay, if he doesn’t find, it is also okay. A child runs after a dog and as he runs, he finds a butterfly; he changes. He starts running after the butterfly, a flower catches his eye, and he has forgotten the butterfly and the flower takes his total attention. He is not serious, but very sincere. Whatever takes his mind he is totally with it – that is sincerity. Now he has forgotten the butterfly and the dog, and the flower is everything. When you can pay your total attention to something, it is sincerity. When you are paying your attention only as a means, you are cunning. You really want to reach the goal, and this is only a means. You are exploiting; you are exploiting the path to reach the goal. For the child, the path is the goal. For the religious person, the path is also the goal. Wherever I am, it is the goal. Whatever I am, it is the goal. At this moment, my whole life converges upon me; there is nowhere else to go. One has just to celebrate this moment in totality.
This is what a religious being is; unworried, just going for a morning walk, not going anywhere. It is different. You walk on the same path when you go to your office, you walk on the same path when you go for your morning walk – the path is the same, the house is the same, everything is the same; you are the same, your legs are the same; when you go for a morning walk everything is different. A religious person is just on the way for a morning walk, and a nonreligious person is going somewhere, to the office, to the shop – a goal is there. The worldly man is goal oriented; whatever the goal, even God. A non-worldly man is not goal oriented. A non-worldly man lives here and now, everything converges here and now. And this here and now becomes infinite. You travel on all the paths to it, but still it remains unreachable. That is also the beauty. If we could reach, everything would be lost. If we could know ourselves, what then? You would simply be bored by yourself. No, that boredom never comes because it is an ongoing process, infinite, from one infinity to another.
Remember these words – not in the mind, let them go deeper and settle in the heart:
Let us not make arbitrary conjectures
about the greatest matters.

Much learning does not teach understanding.

Seekers after gold
dig up much earth and find little.

You could not discover the limits of the soul
even if you traveled every road to do so –
such is the depth of its meaning.
Enough for today.

============================================================

When some visitors
unexpectedly found Heraclitus
warming himself by the cooking fire,
he said to them:
Here, too, are the gods.

I have searched myself.

Time is a child
moving counters in a game;
the royal power is a child’s.

Bigotry is the sacred disease.
There are two ways to seek the true: one is to borrow knowledge, the other is to seek yourself. Of course borrowing is easy, but whatever you borrow is never yours, and that which is not yours cannot be true. This condition must be fulfilled; truth must be yours.
I may have known truth, but I cannot transfer it to you. In the very act of transferring it becomes a lie. That is the nature of truth. So nobody can give it to you, you cannot borrow it, you cannot steal it, you cannot purchase it – you have to know it. And unless you know, your knowledge is not a knowing – it is a hiding place for your ignorance. You are deceiving yourself, you are completely misguided.
The first thing to remember is that truth is a lived phenomenon. Who can live for you? You have to live for yourself, nobody can be a substitute. Who can love for you? ? servants cannot do that, friends cannot be of any help; you have to love. Jean-Paul Sartre says somewhere, “Sooner or later a time will come when people will engage servants to love for them.” Of course, rich people are already on the way. Sooner or later those who can afford it will not bother themselves. Why bother when a servant can do it? You can find a beautiful, good servant, and he can love for you. You have other more important things to do – love can be left to servants.

Mulla Nasruddin once told me, “I am very interested in my wife’s happiness.”
I asked, “What are you doing?”
He replied, “I have hired a private detective to search for the reasons.”

But can anyone else love for you? ? no, it’s not possible. You cannot be alive by proxy, you cannot love by proxy – and you cannot reach truth by proxy. That is the very nature of things. There is no way to be cunning and clever about it. Man has tried: “There is one who knows; we can get it from him, we can borrow it.” But truth has to be lived. It is not something outside, it is an inner growth. It is not a thing, it is not an object; it is your subjectivity.
Truth is subjectivity, so how can you get it from anyone else ? from scriptures, Vedas, Korans, Bibles? No, Jesus is not of much help, neither is Buddha. You have to go through it, there is no shortcut. You have to travel, suffer. Many times you will fall, you will err, you will go astray – that’s how it is. Come back again and again; start the search again and again. Many times the path is lost. Many times you move in a circle and come back to the same point again and again. There seems to be no progress – but go on searching. Go on searching and don’t feel hopeless and dejected. Keep the hope; that is the quality of a seeker.
A seeker trusts, hopes; he can wait, he can wait infinitely. He has patience and he goes on seeking. Not that every step leads to the goal, sometimes he is moving in just the opposite direction. But even moving in the opposite direction one learns; even erring is a part of learning. Nobody can learn if they are very afraid of making an error. If one is very afraid of going astray, there is no possibility of traveling. This is why the mind says, “Ask the awakened, those who know – gather from them.” But then it is secondhand, and there is no such thing as a secondhand truth, it is simply a lie. A secondhand truth is a lie. A truth, has to be firsthand, original. It has to be fresh, you have to reach it – it is always virgin.
Heraclitus says:
I have searched myself.
He is saying, “I am not saying something that I have heard – I have searched myself. It is not something that I have learned, it is something I have grown myself. It is a growth, it is a subjectivity – it is my own experience.” When it is your experience, it transforms you.
Jesus says, “Truth liberates.” But you know many truths and they have not liberated you. On the contrary, they have become bondages, they are the fetters around you. Truth liberates, lies become a prison.
That’s why Heraclitus says:
Bigotry is the sacred disease.
A man who knows himself is never bigoted, he is never a sectarian; he is never obsessed by a theory. He never makes any claim that only he is true because when one knows the truth, one also knows that the truth is multifaceted, and one knows that there are millions of ways of looking at it. Whenever someone comes near, whatever he sees is individual. It has never been so before, it will never be that way again – because this individual has never been there, and this individual is totally unique. So every vision, every encounter of truth is unique. It cannot be compared.
A man who has known himself also knows that there are millions of paths, millions of faces of the truth. How can he be bigoted? How can he say, “Only my truth is true, and only my god is God; your god is a false god”? This is the language of one whose truth is borrowed. You see millions of religious people all over the world claiming truth. They haven’t come to know, they have not searched themselves; otherwise how can they miss? How can they miss the multifaceted experience, the phenomenon of truth? How can they say, “Only my truth” because when one comes to know that there is no “I,” how can one claim? How is bigotry possible?
A really religious man has no claim. He accommodates, he does not tolerate. When you say “I tolerate,” there is intolerance. He does not say, “I am a Christian, you are a Hindu. Yes, I am a man of tolerance, I tolerate. You may also be true; I am true, you may also be true. I tolerate you.” But tolerance always hides intolerance; the very word is intolerant. So whenever a person says, “I am tolerant,” be aware that he is intolerant, he is hiding. What do you mean by your tolerance? ? you think you are somewhere higher and you are tolerating those who are lower, pitying them. Or, at the most, a Christian will say, “Yes, there are many ways, but my way is the best. Yes, people have also reached by other ways, but mine is the super highway.” That, too, is intolerance. Why claim this? Why this “I”? Why this ego?
That’s why religions became so quarrelsome. They have murdered, killed, and have committed all sorts of sins. They are here to liberate man, and they are here to take man beyond all sins, yet they have committed all the sins. Religions have killed more than anyone else, and they have created more misery, strife, struggle and conflict than anything else on this earth. This earth is ugly because of so many churches, temples, mosques. They have not united man, they have divided. They have not made humanity one. They talk about love, but they have created hate. They talk about peace, but have created all sorts of causes for violence to exist. They feed violence and they talk about peace. Why? ? the reason is not religion; the reason is bigotry.
Heraclitus says: Bigotry is the sacred disease. Diseases are bad, and when they are sacred they are worse of course. When a disease looks as though it is sacred, you think it is the ultimate in health. Whenever someone claims, “I am the only truth,” that claim can be made in very subtle ways. These mad people have even forced their gods to say things which look absurd. Mohammedans state, “God says, ‘I am the only God, and Mohammed is the only prophet.’” What do you mean? Is God exhausted in Mohammed? Then God is very poor. What about Mahavira, Buddha, Jesus, Krishna, Lao Tzu, Heraclitus? What about all of you who are someday or other going to become prophets? What about the whole? Mohammed is beautiful, but Mohammedans claim that he is the only prophet and ugliness enters. Jesus is wonderful, but Christians say that he is the only begotten son. Why the only begotten son? Then what are all of you – bastards? If he is the only begotten son, what is this whole existence? From where do you come if he comes from God? Who is your father?
No, God is infinitely potential. Millions of Jesuses can come from him and he remains the same, he is not exhausted – that is the meaning of omnipotent. If he has only one son, he seems to be impotent rather than omnipotent. He goes on creating and the creativity never ends – that is the infinity. But Christians claim that Jesus is the only son. Why do they claim this? ? so they can claim their book is the only book. The word bible means the book. They have not named it because for them this is the only book, all else is rubbish. What about the Upanishads? What about the sayings of Buddha? What about Lao Tzu’s Tao Te Ching? Why should the Bible be the only book? It is beautiful, but when it becomes the only book it has become ill.
When you claim that your truth is the whole and all, this is the sacred disease and the ego has entered. Truth needs no claim. It’s simply there in all its beauty; you can see it but it has no claim on you. In fact, truth never tries to convert anybody. It helps, it loves you, it would like you to be transformed, but there is no effort to convert. But Hindus try to make Christians Hindus, Christians try to make Hindus Christians. Why all this effort? – because they believe that they have the sole key, the only key; everyone else is going to hell. When people start converting they make the thing very narrow. The way is infinite because it leads to infinity.
When the goal is infinite, how can the way be so narrow? In fact, whenever a man is religious he is not Christian, Hindu, nor Mohammedan. That’s what I am trying to help you to be, not Christian, Hindus, nor Mohammedan. Why can’t you simply be? What is the need to carry the label of a sect? If you feel good, if you love Jesus, it is very beautiful. If you love Buddha, it is good – but why become bigoted? Why become prejudiced? Your love is beautiful and if it helps you, it is good – move accordingly. There are millions of people who move in different ways. Let them move, help them; wherever they are going, help them. Help them to move in their own ways, let them do their own thing. Don’t force them and don’t try to convert them. If they look at you and feel something and want to change their path, it is up to them. That’s why Heraclitus is completely forgotten because he never created a sect around him. He had followers, but he never created a sect and he never claimed anything. He never said, “This is the only truth.”
When somebody says, “This is the only truth,” why does this appeal? ? you are very uncertain and confused, so when somebody claims that his is the only truth, you think that he must know, otherwise how can he claim? The claim becomes a subtle influence, he looks authoritative. But remember, a man of knowledge, a man of understanding, is always hesitant. He is not so authoritative because he sees the truth and feels it cannot be expressed – he hesitates. You will find poetry in his words, but you will not find statements. He has a subtle aroma around him which gives you a feeling of certainty, but that certainty doesn’t come from his statements. His statements are always hesitant; before he says anything he hesitates – because he knows that whatever is said cannot be the truth, and he knows that whatever he is trying to do is a dangerous thing. It is hazardous because words destroy, and when you hear the words you will give your own meaning to them.
A man of understanding hesitates. He doesn’t know what will happen to his words; what your actions will be is unknown, and each single word can become very, very meaningful to you, or a meaningful effort on your part. He hesitates, he watches you; he looks around and tries to find the center of your being, and then says something. So that it never becomes a misunderstanding and misguides you, so that if his words help, it is okay and don’t prove harmful to you – he hesitates. But a man of borrowed knowledge never hesitates. He is very, very certain. Just listen to Christian missionaries; they seem to be so certain that their certainty says that they are stupid. Why this certainty? They don’t know anything, they have been trained – trained for everything.
I used to visit a Christian theological college, and used to watch how they prepare priests and ministers. I was amazed – the whole thing seems to be so stupid. They even practice gestures; how to stand at the pulpit, what to say, how to say it; when to raise your voice, when to whisper; how to exactly raise your hand – everything is trained. They look like actors. They don’t know anything, but they never hesitate because they have been trained. Training, discipline, learning cannot make you religious. You can become an actor, and may even become a very skilled one. You may become so skilled that not only do you deceive others, but you deceive yourself also.
If you ask psychoanalysts they have an answer: “A man who feels hesitant within, always creates a certainty outside.” He is afraid of his own inner uncertainty, so he clings to certain statements. A man who is certain within doesn’t bother; he can hesitate, he can afford to hesitate, there is no fear. He can say, “Perhaps”; there is no need to be certain. He can say, “God is summer and winter; night and day; satiety and hunger; he is both rest and restlessness” – he can be paradoxical. The paradox is used just to give you a feeling that the man is not claiming anything, he is simply trying to say the fact. If the fact is complex, let it be so. If the fact is contradictory, let the statement also be contradictory – let it be a true reflection. You cannot ask a man of learning to be so paradoxical: God is summer and winter – no. He is absolutely certain of what God is. He is day, never night; he is light, never darkness; he is good, never bad; he is peace, never war. When God is both war and peace, where are you? You become uncertain, you hesitate.
Heraclitus says: I have searched myself. That’s why he is so paradoxical, and always looks for the paradox. If a man has searched himself he will always find it because what can he do? If existence is paradoxical, what can he do? He has to represent it as it is. But go to a missionary – he has never searched. He has learned much, he can quote scriptures. In fact, he cannot do anything other than quote scriptures. And you know very well that the Devil is very skilled in quoting scriptures – he is the perfect missionary.
When some visitors
unexpectedly found Heraclitus
warming himself by the cooking fire,
he said to them:
Here, too, are the gods.
Heraclitus never went to a temple because if you are a man of perception, if your eyes are open, and you can hear and feel, what’s the need to go to a temple? The gods are also here. God is not a person, he is all that is the case; he is existence.
Just imagine the picture: Heraclitus sitting by the fireside, warming himself; the crackling of the wood, the flames rising toward heaven, the warmth. It must have been a cold winter night – some visitors arrive unexpectedly and ask, “What are you doing?”
He replies, “Here also are gods.” What he is saying is that the fire becomes a divine phenomenon and this warming yourself is a prayer.

It reminds me of a Zen Master, Ikkyu. He was traveling and stayed in a temple overnight. The night was very, very cold, so he made a fire. Not finding any wood, he took a wooden statue of Buddha from the temple and burned it. The priest was fast asleep; the noise, the fire, and Ikkyu moving about woke him up. He opened his eyes and looked, and looked again – he was aghast, he couldn’t believe it; Ikkyu was a Buddhist monk, and not only a monk but a very famous master. He jumped out of his bed, came running and said, “What are you doing? You have burned a Buddha!”
Ikkyu took out a small piece of wood and searched in the ashes for the Buddha – the statue was almost gone, nothing was left.
The priest said, “What are you looking for? It’s no longer there.”
Ikkyu replied, “I am searching for the bones – Buddha must have bones.”
The priest laughed and said, “Now I am completely certain you are mad. How can a wooden Buddha have bones?”
Ikkyu said, “Then bring the other two Buddhas because the night is still long and very cold, and the buddha within me needs a little warmth. Don’t worry, these Buddhas are just wooden. Inside here are bones and a real buddha; this buddha needs a little warmth. These Buddhas are no good anyway, they have no bones, so don’t worry.”
The priest threw him out of the temple. The night was very cold, but there are people who will worship a wooden Buddha and throw out a real buddha. In the morning the priest looked around to see what had happened to Ikkyu; he was sitting just outside the temple near a milestone – worshipping it. The sun was rising, it was a beautiful morning and he had found a few flowers from somewhere. He had put the flowers on the milestone and he was worshipping. The priest came running and said, “What are you doing? You are really completely mad! During the night you burned a Buddha and now you are worshipping a milestone.”
Ikkyu said, “Here, also, is a god.”

Heraclitus: Here, too, are gods.
If you can feel, every moment is divine and everything is divine, and all that exists is holy. If you cannot feel, go to the temples, go to the mosques and churches, but you will not find anything there either – because it is you who need a transformation, it is not the situation that needs change. The situation remains the same; in the temple, outside the temple, God is everywhere. It is you who cannot see and so you change places; from your house you go to the temple in search of God.
You need an inner transformation. The change in the situation won’t help. You need a psychological reorientation. You need a totally new way of looking at things, and suddenly the whole world becomes the temple; there is nothing else.
Fire became the symbol for Heraclitus; fire is really a beautiful symbol. Heraclitus says, “Fire is the basic substance of life.” It is! Now physicists agree with Heraclitus. They agree that electricity is the base of all existence, and that everything is nothing but modes of electricity. Heraclitus says, “It is fire.” What’s the difference? Fire is a much more beautiful word than electricity. Fire gives a sense of more aliveness than electricity, and it is wilder than electricity.
When you say, “Electricity is the base,” it looks as if the universe is somehow mechanical because electricity has become associated with a mechanism, and God looks like an engineer – but electricity is fire.
Hindus have called this basic element prana, vitality – but vitality is fire. When you are vital, alive, you are fiery, aflame. Henri Bergson has called the base of all, élan vital, just like prana. Those who have been seeking come near fire somehow or other. Deep down this existence is fire. Fire is life. And Zarathustra made fire the supreme-most god; he is right. He must have agreed with Heraclitus – they were contemporaries. Fire became the supreme god for the followers of Zarathustra.
Fire has many deep things in it. You will have to understand the phenomenon of fire, the symbol, because it is a way of speaking, it is a metaphor. Heraclitus wants to indicate something deep when he says, “Fire is the substratum.” On a winter’s night just sit by the side of a fire and watch, just feel it, the warmth. Death is cold, life is warmth. A dead body is cold, a live body is warm – and you have to continuously maintain a certain warmth. There exists in man an inner mechanism to always keep the warmth within at a certain limit because life is possible only between those certain degrees. Human life exists between ninety-five and one hundred and ten degrees, just between those fifteen degrees. There are other lives which exist at other temperatures, but human life has a span of just fifteen degrees.

Mulla Nasruddin was very, very ill, with a high fever. The doctor took his temperature and said, “One hundred and five.”
Mulla opened his eyes and asked, “What is the world record?” – because the ego always thinks in terms of world records. He was thinking, “Maybe I couldn’t beat anyone in any other way, but maybe I can break the world record in fever.”

Beyond one hundred and ten there is no record because the man simply disappears, you cannot absorb so much fire. Below ninety-five you disappear, so cold that death settles in.
That’s why we say, “A warm welcome,” not, “A cold welcome.” Warm love, not cold love – because cold symbolizes death, warmth symbolizes life. The sun is the source, solar energy is fire. Just watch, in the evening everything becomes sad. Trees, birds become completely silent; no song, all their songs disappear. Flowers close and the whole earth waits for the morning. In the morning, the sun has not risen yet and the earth starts becoming ready to welcome it. The birds start singing even before the sun has arisen – that is a welcome sign. Flowers start flowering again; everything becomes alive again, movement enters.
Fire is a very, very meaningful symbol in other ways. If you watch fire you will see a continuous upward movement. Water flows downward, fire flows upward – that’s why the Hindus talk about “the fire of kundalini.” When you rise upward you are not like water, you are like a flame of fire. When your inner being changes, you feel a flame going upward; even water, when in contact with fire, starts evaporating upward.
In a very, very old Tibetan scripture it is said that a master is like fire and the disciple is like water. If the disciple comes in deep contact with the master, the quality of the disciple changes – it becomes the quality of fire, just like heated water evaporates. Water without fire moves downward. With fire immediately a change comes in. Beyond one hundred degrees the fire has made the water ready to move upward; the dimension changes.
Fire always moves upward. Even if you hold a lamp upside down the flame will go upward, it cannot go downward. Fire is an effort to reach the highest peak, the omega point. Another thing, if you watch a flame, you can only see it for a few split seconds, then it disappears. The higher you go, the more you disappear; the lower you go, the more you become solid. Watch water, if it goes on getting lower and lower and colder and colder, it becomes frozen, it becomes ice. It is like stone, all movement stops – it is dead. When water is frozen, it is dead, it is no longer alive. You will have to melt it through fire and movement will appear again. You will have to heat it so much that it comes to a hundred degree point and will move upward.
So there are three stages. No movement, that is when you are frozen; a downward movement, that is when you are like water. The first stage like ice, the second like water ? the third is when you evaporate, you move upward. Almost all three stages exist simultaneously in you. Some part of you is like fire, moving upward, a very small part, very tiny ? that’s why you’ve come to me, otherwise there would be no need.
Why have you come to me? ? you must have a tiny part which moves upward, and that tiny part feels as though it is being pulled down by your whole being; that is the anguish. You know that something in you goes toward the divine. In some moments you feel like a bird and you can simply fly, but only in some moments. Even in those moments the greater part of you is hanging like stone; one part hangs like stone. Almost ninety percent of you is like ice. Nine percent of you moves like water, downward. In sex, in anger, in hatred, you move downward – but at least it is better to move downward than not move at all. That’s why, if I feel a very frozen being in you, I tell you to fall in love, move toward sex because at least it will melt you. Of course you will not be flying upward, you will move downward, but at least movement is good. And once there is movement, the direction can be changed, the dimension can be changed. But frozen? Just go and look in the monasteries if you want to see perfect examples of frozen ice.
Go to the Catholic or Jaina monasteries. There you will find perfect frozen ice cubes, no men – because they are against sex, against food, against everything. They are just negative, they have been negating. By and by, if you negate, your life loses fire because fire is a positive force. If you negate, you become cold. Negativity is a method of suicide. By and by, you die; you are frozen and kill yourself in fragments. But this is no achievement, in fact it is a downward step.
I say to people, “If you are frozen, move toward sex; that will help.” Of course, it is not going to lead you toward the ultimate, but one thing will happen: you will start moving. Your bioenergy starts moving when you love a person, and feel for some other person. That’s why you feel very excited in sex; fire has begun to function, and when you make love, your body temperature rises. Love is like fever, a temporary fever created by your mind. That’s why after love you relax deeply, you have a flow. If you attain a sexual orgasm, a complete flow happens, your bioenergy is moving. Those people who cannot have deep orgasms are difficult people, for meditation also – because they cannot move, so how can they move upward?
The first thing is movement. The second thing is to turn the movement upward. Many people cannot move, they are afraid, they are frozen. You can see their bodies clearly as frozen phenomena. If you touch them, you will feel that their bodies are cold. You shake hands with them and it feels like you are shaking hands with the dead branch of a tree, no movement. You take their hands in yours and feel that no energy is being transmitted. Their hand is there, feeling just like a dead branch. It doesn’t give and doesn’t receive; it doesn’t communicate. Watch people, just by their walking, their faces, their movements, you can see whether they are orgasmic or not.
The first thing for a master to know about you is whether you are orgasmic or not. If you are orgasmic, if your whole body vibrates when you make love, and the vibrating phenomenon is so deep that you are no more for a single second; of course you become just a flow, energy moves like a flood from head to toe and there are no blocks of ice within you, everything melts. After making love you fall asleep like a child because the energy has moved. You have played long, you are tired, but this tiredness is very nice. This tiredness is relaxation, now you can relax – and the body feels alive. Hence the appeal of sex – because it is really your body trying to find a way to be orgasmic, to be river like, not frozen.
When you are frozen you cannot relate. When you are frozen you are closed within yourself, you make an imprisonment – and from this imprisonment there is no way to God. You will have to melt. And before you reach the divine, before you can relate to the divine, you will have to relate to other people in this world. When you relate to other people – when you love, care – your body melts, it flows. Another step can be taken when it flows.
When the energy is flowing, it is very simple to heat the body in certain inner ways. All meditations are methods to give you heat, more heat than sex can give. Meditations, particularly those we are doing here, are all to create fire within you. Through breathing, fast chaotic breathing, fire is created because breathing brings more and more oxygen, and with more oxygen, more fire happens; without oxygen, there is no fire. When a flame burns, it burns because of oxygen. If there is no oxygen, the fire will subside automatically. More oxygen has to be brought to your body because you are too frozen. You are not alive enough, you are not warm enough.
People come to me, particularly the frozen ones, and say, “We don’t like this dynamic meditation.” They don’t like it because they are frozen and they have too much invested in their frozenness. They don’t love, but they think they are brahmacharis, celibates – they are simply frozen, ice cubes. There is no movement in their lives, but they think they are detached. Of course, there is a detachment that comes when you flow upward, but that is totally different. There is a detachment that happens when you don’t flow at all. Of course a dead man is detached, a dead man is celibate – a dead man is completely dead. You can be detached like a dead man; that is what has happened in all the monasteries of the whole world. You can be detached in a totally different way, a qualitatively, diametrically opposite way. That is when you become so alive that the fire comes to a point where the water doesn’t flow downward, it starts flowing upward.
More fire has to be created within you; you should become a furnace. Absorb more oxygen, make more effort, and allow the body as much movement as possible ? bring energy, throbbing energy. It is there – you just have to make it throbbing. Live like a flame burning from both ends. Only then, suddenly one day, you find that your energy is flowing upward, that you have become a flame. You can see yourself up to a certain extent, and you are no more. Suddenly, you disappear into the cosmos; you have become one with the divine. This is the symbol of fire – you can only see it for a few seconds and it disappears.
A buddha is continuously disappearing. Look at me, if you can see, you will see that I am continuously disappearing. You can see up to a certain extent. That’s why the aura is seen around a man who is awakened. That aura is nothing but a disappearing fire, a continuously disappearing fire. Up to a certain extent you can see it, hence the aura. Beyond that aura there is nothing, it disappears.
Heraclitus is very, very right in finding the symbol. It is not a philosophical statement, but in Greek histories of philosophy they think Heraclitus is proposing, like others – Thales, Anaxagoras, Anaximenes and other Greek philosophers ? an element. There are four elements: earth, water, fire, air, so there have been philosophers who proposed that earth is the basic element; somebody else proposed that water is the basic element; somebody else fire; somebody else air. Heraclitus proposes that fire is the basic element, but he should not be understood in the way that Thales is understood, no. It is not a statement. It is not a statement about a philosophical theme or theory; he is not proposing any doctrine. He is a poet, not a philosopher at all. He is giving a symbol, and the symbol means much more than the word fire.
Watch fire outside, watch fire inside, and become as much of a flame as possible.
That’s why Heraclitus says:
When some visitors
unexpectedly found Heraclitus
warming himself by the cooking fire,
he said to them:
Here, too, are the gods.

I have searched myself.
And I am not just saying this because others have said – I have known myself.
He says:
Time is a child
moving counters in a game;
the royal power is a child’s.
The royal power is a child’s, and time is a child moving counters in a game… The whole concept of leela, play, he condenses in just a few sentences. Life is like a play – don’t make it a business, otherwise you will miss it. You miss it because you make a business out of it and it is a play. Play well, but don’t think in terms of achieving something out of it. Just be like a child; he plays, he is not worried about what he achieves out of it. Small children, even if they are defeated in a game, jump and feel very happy. Failure is not a failure if it is a play; defeat is not a defeat if it is a play. Otherwise, if it is a business, even victory is a defeat. Ask the Napoleons, Alexanders; even victory is defeat. What do you find finally after victory? ? you are victorious and nothing has been achieved. You longed so much for this goal and now you have reached it – you simply feel frustrated and your whole life is lost. Remember, if you are after goals your life will be lost because life has no goal. It is a purposeless play. It is not going anywhere, it is simply enjoying itself.
This is the most difficult thing to understand because the mind is mathematical. It says, “What is the meaning of it, what is the purpose?” There is no purpose and no meaning. Then the mind immediately says, “If there is no meaning why live, why not commit suicide?” But see this: if there is meaning, the whole thing will become ugly and it will be like a business. If there is purpose, all life will lose the poetry.
The poetry is there because there is no purpose. Why does the rose flower? Ask the rose, it will say, “I don’t know – but flowering is so beautiful, what is the need to know? Flowering in itself, intrinsically, is so beautiful.” Ask a bird, “Why do you sing?” and he will be simply puzzled at what such nonsense questions you ask. Singing is so beautiful, it is such a benediction – why raise the question? But the mind looks for the goal, the mind is an achiever. It cannot simply enjoy. There must be something to be achieved in the future, some goal to be reached, then the mind feels good. If there is nothing to be achieved, it flops. But that is what the whole effort is – let it flop! There is no purpose, there is no goal.
This moment, the whole of existence is celebrating – all except you. Why not participate? Why not be like a flower, purposelessly flowering? Why not be like a river, meaninglessly flowing? Why not be like the ocean, roaring, just enjoying?
This is what Heraclitus says:
Time is a child moving counters in a game; the royal power is a child’s. Every child is a king. Just watch a child – every child is simply a king, an emperor. Look at his movement; even if the child is naked, no emperor can compete with him. Why is a child so beautiful? Without any exception every child is beautiful. What is the beauty of a child? ? he is still uncontaminated by the mind, which seeks purpose, meaning, a goal. He simply plays, he doesn’t bother about the next day.

A small child arrived home. His mother was very angry and said, “I have heard from some neighborhood children that you threw mud in a small girl’s mouth and you have been punished – you had to stand outside the class the whole day!”
He replied, “Yes.”
His mother was horrified and said, “Why did you throw that mud?”
The small child shrugged his shoulders and said, “Well, the mouth was open.”

The why is meaningless. It is enough in itself; he had mud in his hand and the mouth was open, so what to do? It simply happened.

We are asking why. Why is irrelevant for a child – it is how it happened! The mouth was open and he had the mud. He did not do it really. We wrongly punish him, he did not do it – it happened, it simply happened this way. It was a coincidence that the girl was standing with an open mouth. He didn’t mean anything, he didn’t mean any harm, he didn’t mean any insult. He simply welcomed the opportunity, he enjoyed it. But we ask why.
An abyss exists between a child and a grown-up; they are poles apart. The child cannot understand what the adults are saying because he lives in a totally different dimension – the dimension of play. The adults cannot understand what the child is doing because the adult is a businessman; he lives in the world of whys, reasons, causes. They never meet, they cannot, and there is no possibility of understanding unless the adult becomes a child again. Only a saint, a real sage, can understand a child because he is also a child. He can understand.

I was reading a small child’s diary. On the twenty-fifth of December it is written: “Got an air-gun from Uncle Joe. Uncle Joe is the greatest uncle in the world. There has never been such an uncle and never will be, etcetera, etcetera. But it is raining and I can’t go out. I would like to go and hunt immediately.”
26th December: “It is still raining, and I am feeling very, very restless.”
27th December: “It is still raining, and I am frustrated and feeling very aggressive and violent.”
28th December: “It is still raining – shot Uncle Joe.”

This is a child’s world. He moves without any purpose, playing. Playing in itself is enough. If you become a child again, you have achieved all. If you cannot become a child again, you have missed all. A sage is a twice-born child. First-born children are not real children because they will have to grow up. The second birth is the real birth because when somebody is twice-born he has given birth to himself. It is a transformation, he has become a child again. He does not ask for reasons, the why and wherefore, he simply lives. Whatever the moment presents, he moves with it; he has no plans, he has no projections. He lives without demanding anything, and that is the only way to live; otherwise, you simply appear to be living, you are not alive. For a child there is nothing bad, nothing good, there is no God, no Devil; a child accepts everything. Again, a sage accepts everything. That’s why he can say, “God is winter and summer, peace and war; he is the Devil and the good – both.” For a sage, again all morality disappears, all distinctions fall away; everything is holy and every place is sacred.

I was staying with a Christian family. The mother was talking to her child and was saying, “This is not good, you needn’t pray so loudly – you almost shout. Prayers don’t have to be shouted. God can hear you, you need not shout so much.”
The child said, “But it says, ‘Hollered be thy name!’” A child lives somewhere else.
The mother was very, very angry. I said to her: “Don’t disturb him, it is too soon to disturb his childhood. Let him follow his own way of praying – he is enjoying it, and that enjoyment is the real thing, not the form. He jumps and hollers the name of God, and it is beautiful! Why are you teaching him otherwise? This is the way it should be; if you enjoy, it becomes a prayer. If you don’t enjoy, if it becomes a discipline someone else is forcing on you, you feel imprisoned. Let him holler, let him jump – I can be a witness to him; God hears him. The point is not whether he hollers or not, but whether he enjoys.”

A man who can be blissful need not pray – prayer is a poor substitute. A man who is blissful need not meditate. A man who is blissful can live the moment blissfully, and has done all that can be done. Everything is holy and sacred. You can eat your food in such a way that it becomes prayer. You can love a man in such a way that it becomes prayer. You can dig a hole in the garden in such a way that it becomes prayer. Prayer is not a formal thing – it is the quality of prayerfulness that you bring to something.
…the royal power is a child’s. Why? – because the royal power means innocence. God comes to you when you are innocent. When you are cunning the door is closed. Never destroy anyone’s innocence, never create doubts in someone who is innocent because innocence is the royal power. Never create doubt in anyone because once trust is destroyed and innocence is broken, it is very, very difficult – it is just like a broken mirror.
This is the problem for a master; you are all like broken mirrors because somewhere on the path of life your trust has been destroyed. You cannot believe, you have been raised to doubt; you have a very cultivated, sophisticated doubting mind. This is the problem. Nothing can happen to you – not God, no! – unless a trust is created again. You are like a broken mirror, and you insist on being a broken mirror. You think that to doubt is some great thing that you have – that is your poverty.
A child’s heart is the royal power. And the power comes to you with innocence. When I say trust, and when all the masters of the world say trust, they mean, become innocent. But you insist on doubting, and you argue and rationalize first. You insist that you should be convinced about something first, then you will take a step – and that is the very problem, that’s precisely the problem. Everything becomes possible if you can take one trusting step in darkness. But you cannot take that one step. And look, what have you achieved through doubting, where have you reached with this broken mirror? You have become addicted to it because it has remained with you so long.

Mulla Nasruddin was teaching his son the ways of the world – a small child, a beautiful child – and he told him to go up a ladder. The child followed. He always liked to climb, and he was surprised because Mulla was always saying, “Don’t climb the tree, don’t climb the ladder,” so why now? But he was very happy.
He climbed, reached the top, and Mulla, standing at the bottom, said, “Now jump.” The child hesitated a little, but the Mulla said, “I am your father, why are you worried? Jump!”
The child jumped and Mulla moved away. He fell to the ground, started crying and weeping, and said, “What have you done to me?”
Mulla replied, “Now remember, don’t believe anyone, not even your father. This is the way of the world and I am making you ready for it. Don’t believe anyone, not even if he is your father. You have learned a good lesson. Don’t trust!”

This is how every father, mother, teacher, schools, universities, are preparing you. Don’t trust anyone because someone may be dishonest; he may be a fraud, he may deceive you. But this is the problem; even if the whole world deceives you, you will not lose anything. But if you doubt, you will lose everything. Doubt is the real deceiver because ultimately you will miss God. God comes through the door of innocence. Can you trust anything in your life? If you search you will find no one, nothing you can trust.
It happened…

A man came to a very great mystic, Nagarjuna. Nagarjuna asked him, “Do you love anyone, do you trust anyone?”
The man replied, “I don’t trust anyone and I don’t love anyone – except my cow.”
Nagarjuna said, “That will do. Believe completely that your cow is God. Love her, trust her, feed her, care about her, and after three months come back to me.”
But the man said, “How can it happen, just loving and trusting the cow?”
Nagarjuna replied, “Don’t worry. After three months come back to me.”
The man came back completely transformed. He said, “You have done a miracle! I cannot yet believe it, but it has happened; just trusting, loving and caring for the cow, I have experienced something which has made me a completely different man. I am reborn! But how could it happen – just trusting a cow?”
Nagarjuna said, “It is not a question of trusting a cow, it is a question of trusting.”

If you can trust even a small thing, the door widens. When you have tasted trust, you become more capable of trust. When you taste more, you become more and more capable, and you can take the ultimate jump. Time is a child moving counters in a game; the royal power is a child’s.
Heraclitus has no mathematical theory about time. He says about time that it is just like a child moving counters in a game; they move day and night. Heraclitus does not believe that time is going somewhere. It is moving, it is moving in a circle. It is not linear, it is like a wheel. This is something to be understood. All scientists think that time is linear, that it is moving in a line; all the knowers of the inner say that it is a wheel – it is not linear, it is circular. There seems to be some reason for it. Scientists cannot see the whole, they see just a part. The scientific mind is a specific mind, specialized. The scientist can see only a part, and he also divides the part to see an even smaller part. He goes on dividing – the scientist cannot see the whole. The very discipline of science makes him capable of seeing the part more clearly. He goes on seeing more and more clearly, but less and less. His vision becomes clear and penetrating, but his object becomes smaller and smaller. He comes to the atom, the smallest; in time he also comes to the moment, the smallest.
If you see a small sector of a circle it will look like a line, but the circle is vast – just like on the earth. We are sitting here, and if we draw a line and think it is a straight, you are wrong – because on a circular earth, how can you draw a straight line? If you go on drawing that line, if you continue it, it will become a circle, it will encompass the whole earth. So all straight lines are just parts, fragments of a vast, big circle.
Science cannot see the whole and that is why time seems to be linear. Religion sees the whole. Science misses the forest, it looks at the tree; religion misses the tree, and looks at the forest. When you look at the whole, everything is circular. All movement is circular, and time is also a circular movement. It is a game, not going anywhere, just moving. If you can see that time is not going anywhere, but moving in a circle, the whole tension of the mind to reach somewhere drops. Then to reach somewhere in the future becomes useless, meaningless – you start enjoying the moment.
Life is not an effort to attain, it is a celebration.
Bigotry is the sacred disease. Even this you should not make into a theory because the moment you make a theory and say, “This is right,” you will start converting people. The moment you say, “This is right,” your ego has taken it. Now it is not a question of this being right – you are right. How can you be wrong? The sacred disease enters. Remember, whatever I say, don’t make it a claim. Whatever I say, don’t make it a belief, don’t become closed by it. Whatever I say, the opposite is also true, remember – because if you say the opposite is wrong, you will become bigoted. Bigotry enters.
If I say that God is winter, then he is also summer. There are moments when I say that God is winter because that will be helpful. There are moments when I say that God is summer because that will be helpful. To some I say that God is winter, and to some I say that God is summer – don’t create a theory around it. I am also a poet. You needn’t believe in what I say, you simply have to be something that I say. Let it become a transformation, not a theory in you. Don’t make a sect out of it; make a life out of it, live it! If you live it, you will also help others to live it.
Only through living do you help; not through talking, not through converting, not through going around and making people more enlightened, no! This is a very subtle mischief. Be enlightened and you will have a light within you and people will come and drink out of it; there is no need to go out of the way. If someone is following his own way, don’t try to pull him out of it. Who knows? That way may be exactly right for him. It may look wrong to you, but who are you to decide? Don’t decide and don’t judge because: bigotry is the sacred disease. Whenever a person becomes religious, this disease is possible. Whenever one becomes religious one becomes vulnerable to this disease, bigotry. It is very difficult to find a religious man who is not bigoted.
It happened…

I saw Mulla Nasruddin drinking in a bar and asked, “Nasruddin, what are you doing? Just yesterday you told me that you have stopped all drinking and have become an absolute teetotaler, so what are you doing?”
Nasruddin replied, “Yes I am an absolute teetotaler – but not a bigoted one.”

Whatever you are, remain flexible. Remain moving and flowing and don’t create a fixed frame around you. Sometimes one has to go out of the discipline. Life is bigger than your discipline and sometimes one has to go completely against one’s own rules – because God is both summer and winter.
Don’t be a victim of bigotry. Be religious, but don’t be a Hindu, a Mohammedan, a Christian. Let the whole earth be your church, let the whole of existence be your temple. When the whole God is available, why be satisfied with a fragment? Why say Christian, why say Hindu? When you can be a human being, why choose labels? Drop all labels and drop all beliefs. Trust. Trust is totally different from belief. Trust life wherever it leads. Move with it, and help others to move in their own way. Do your thing and let others do theirs. Remain open.
If you can remain open, helping, caring, not forcing things on others, you will see that people have started drinking out of you, that people are being helped by you. Don’t go directly to serve them because service, compassion, love, care, are all indirect. Don’t jump on them, and don’t force them toward heaven because that violence has been the misery of the whole past. Christians, Hindus, Mohammedans have been fighting, killing each other because of that violence. Enough of it, there is no need of it now!
Now the earth has become one. The whole globe has become just like a small village. Let humanity also become one – one in the search, not in the beliefs. One ? because everything is divine.
Always remember Heraclitus: Here, too, are the gods. I have searched myself. And: …the royal power is a child’s. Bigotry is the sacred disease.
Enough for today.

============================================================

A drunken man has to be led by a young boy,
whom he follows stumbling
and not knowing whither he goes,
for his soul is moist.

Souls take pleasure in becoming moist.

A dry soul is wisest and best.
Just as I said yesterday, human consciousness can follow two ways: one way is that of water, flowing downward; the other is that of fire, moving upward. Water and fire are symbols, but very meaningful.
When you flow downward you become more and more unconscious. When you flow upward you become more and more conscious. Upwardness is consciousness; downwardness is unconsciousness.
Heraclitus calls the downward flow of consciousness the state of moisture, and the upward rise of consciousness the state of dryness. Moisture and dryness depend on fire and water. He says the spirit, the human mind: …takes pleasure in being moist.
All pleasure is downward. Wherever you are seeking pleasure, you will go downward because pleasure means being unconscious. Pleasure means being in a certain state where you don’t know any anxiety – not that the anxieties have disappeared, but you are unconscious. The world remains the same; the anxieties are there waiting for you, increasing not decreasing, because as time moves they will increase. Your problems remain the same and even become more complicated. While you are unconscious, everything is growing; it doesn’t wait for your consciousness to be there. Your misery is growing, your anguish is growing; it is waiting for you. You are unconscious so you are not aware. Whenever you come to consciousness again, you will have to face all the problems you had escaped from.
Pleasure is escape; that’s why pleasure is not worth it. In fact it is not pleasure, it is a sort of suicide. You escape from the problems, you turn your back on them, but this is no way to solve them. You will have to come back because once you have become conscious, unconsciousness cannot be a permanent state of affairs. You can dive into unconsciousness, but how long can you remain underwater? ? for a second, and then you are back again on the surface. You cannot remain unconscious for long. Anything in which you become unconscious, in which you momentarily lose all your worries or forget about them ? alcohol, drugs, sex – is a forgetfulness, but forgetfulness cannot be a permanent state.
So this is not helping in any way, pleasure doesn’t help. You have to come back again and again, and it becomes a vicious circle. When you come back and find the anguish, the anxiety, all the problems there waiting – rather, they have increased – you become afraid, you become nervous. Your whole being becomes a state of fear; it trembles and you have to escape again and again. The more you escape, the more the problems increase. The more problems you face, the more alcohol is needed. And the quantity of the intoxicant has to be continuously increased because you become attuned to it. You take a certain amount of a drug; the first day you feel unconscious. After a few days you are not unconscious; you are still conscious, the worries are still there knocking at the door, you can hear them – you need a greater quantity. The greater quantity will also become less. You can move to a point ? in India they have tried; there are a few sects which have been working through alcohol, drugs, such as marijuana, mescaline. In the West it is a new phenomenon; that’s why the West is so worried about it. In the East it is one of the oldest things.
A particular sect of Tantrikas have been working through drugs, finding a way to attain consciousness through using them. By and by, they have found that you become so attuned that nothing can make you unconscious. They have poisonous snakes – just a bite and an ordinary man will die. When a drug no longer affects them, they take a snake and let it bite their tongue. Ordinarily a man will die immediately. They do it just to seek unconsciousness through the most poisonous thing – even that doesn’t affect them. A time comes when the man is completely beyond the world of drugs; you cannot make him unconscious, nothing helps. If this man bites you, you will die immediately. His whole body is poisonous.
In ancient Indian history, there is reference to a particular female spy. Every king trained beautiful girls in such a way that from their very childhood their whole body became poisonous. They were known as vishkanya, poisonous girls – very beautiful. The king would send those girls to his enemies, to the enemy king, and they were so beautiful that he was bound to be attracted. Once they kissed the king, he was dead. They were absolutely poisonous; their kiss was enough – no need even to bite.
A moment comes when no drug helps. These Tantrikas have been working through drugs toward awareness. When no drug affects you, you are already integrated, and now you can move toward the height without any fear of falling because you cannot be made unconscious, you have crystallized your consciousness. Ordinarily one is not working through drugs for consciousness; the path is very dangerous. Ordinarily one is seeking unconsciousness, a little forgetfulness in this world of worries, anguish, anxiety; one wants to forget this world which looks like a hell. All your pleasures are just forgetfulness.
Heraclitus says, “This is a moist state of consciousness.” The word is beautiful – he calls these souls, moist. He says, “Souls enjoy pleasure.” Why? – because pleasure is a downward drift. No effort is needed; you don’t have to do anything, you simply sink downward. It is downhill; you can easily run. No effort is needed, the very pull of gravity helps you down. Moving upward is difficult; that’s why you seek pleasure, you never seek bliss. Bliss is upward, pleasure is downward.
Pleasure is forgetfulness, bliss is remembrance.
Gurdjieff says that the only technique to become integrated is self-remembrance, and all the masters of the world have been insisting on being more and more conscious. The more conscious you become, the more a certain dryness happens inside. Literally, you become more and more dry, more and more aware, more and more conscious and alert. You become more and more dry because awareness is fire.
Listen to these words and try to understand them. They will be a great help on the path you are following.
A drunken man has to be led by a young boy,
whom he follows stumbling
and not knowing whither he goes,
for his soul is moist.
Imagine the picture, visualize it: A drunken man has to be led by a young boy, whom he follows stumbling and not knowing whither he goes, for his soul is moist. This is very symbolic. When you are drunk, you fall back, you regress, you become a small boy again – this regression is not growth. You have to become like a small boy, not by regressing but by growing ahead, growing forward, growing upward. You have to become like a boy, not by falling back, but by going forward. Falling back you will become juvenile; falling back you will not gain, you will lose; falling back, the whole system inside becomes crippled. On the outside you look like an adult, and on the inside you are just like a small boy; not a child, but childish; not innocent, but very, very cunning. The cunningness is so deep that you are not cunning with others – you are playing tricks with yourself, with your own consciousness, with your own future; you are playing cunning tricks with your own possibilities. You are falling back, regressing.
You carry all the stages that you have passed. Once you were in the womb. A part of you still remains in that state because you cannot throw things off. You simply grow and all that has become the past becomes your foundation. Everything exists in you, not only from this life, but from other lives; not only from human lives, but from animal, vegetable lives. Everything exists, nothing is lost. You carry everything of the past – you are your past. The whole past is there and you can regress any moment. It is just like a ladder; you can go back. When you are drunk you go back. You will become not only like a child, you can also become like a vegetable. Just look at a drunk lying in the gutter; he doesn’t look human at all. He has regressed, he is vegetating; you can’t even say that he is alive. How can you say this man is human? What humanity is he showing right now? What is the difference between him and a tree? The only difference is that the tree is in a better state because at least the tree is not drunk. This man has fallen back, he has become like a tree.
You can be so drugged; in the West they use the word stoned. It is very good – you become like a stone. That is the last thing. You are not even a vegetable. You are rocklike, all possibilities lost. You have come to the last step of the ladder, to the very bottom. You have regressed millions of years – that can be done in seconds. You become helpless, helpless in a negative way, an imbecile. You behave like an idiot, you don’t know what you are doing. In fact, you are not; you are absent, your presence is lost. Now inside, no center exists. This is the state of moisture: no center. You have become water, no center, and the water is overflowing everywhere – without any direction, without any inner integrity. If you die in this moment, you will not even be aware that you are dead. You will not know whatever happens in this moment. You are not. This is an absent state of mind. You have fallen down completely, you have reached to the bottom.
This is easy, and souls enjoy it because anything that is easy you enjoy. No effort is needed. You don’t have to follow a path, you don’t have to do anything on your part. You needn’t worry, you needn’t think – you simply drop. In fact, this is dropping out. You have dropped out of the whole effort of evolution. You are no longer a part of a growing existence, you are no longer part of the constantly evolving divinity. You have lost all. This is the worst state possible. This happens not only through intoxicants, this happens through many things. So that, too, has to be remembered. You may not be taking any intoxicant, you may not be on drugs, but there are many subtle drugs – any “trip” can become a drug.
You may be continuously chanting a mantra; not with awareness, just chanting it. If you continuously chant a mantra without awareness, it becomes alcoholic, it gives you unconsciousness. You will feel much pleasure, but no bliss. You are falling back. In India, that too has been used for thousands of years, and thousands of people have been continuously chanting mantras. If you look at them, you will find them also stoned – through chanting mantras they have become unconscious. Of course, they don’t have any worries because to have worries you need awareness. They are happy, but their happiness is like death – stale, stony. Their happiness is not like a flower blossoming; their happiness is a stagnant pool, not like a river flowing. They are not moving at all, the whole inner movement has ceased.
I talked to you about two types of movement, one vertical, the other horizontal. They have stopped the horizontal movement, but they have not started the vertical movement. They are as if dead, buried alive in their own bodies; their bodies have become graves. You can find many of them near Tibet, in the Himalayas. You will find many people just sitting chanting. The continuous chanting has created such boredom within them that they have become numb, they have lost all sensitivity. They are not more alive because of it, they are less alive. They have become so numb that they can lie on a bed of nails – because they have shrunken inside and have no sensitivity in their body. This is a deeper intoxicant than any alcohol ever invented. Because they are the masters of their own alcohol, they can create it inside.
If you chant a word continuously without awareness, you regress. If you chant, it has to be done with awareness; you remain a witness. If you are chanting, “Om, om, om,” you have to remain a witness to it. The chanting should be done by the body and you should remain a witness. If the witness is lost, the chanting is alcoholic – it has become an intoxicant. There are other ways too. A politician is on a drug trip: power, prestige, is alcoholic. So whenever someone reaches power, he is no longer in his senses. Power corrupts and corrupts absolutely because power is a drug. When you are powerful you are no longer in your consciousness. You start doing things you would never have imagined. You yourself cannot believe that you can do such things.
Read about Adolf Hitler and his life ? what he did. He never smoked, was against alcohol – he was a perfect sannyasin! He would get up early in the morning, go to sleep early at night; no smoking, no drinking; a vegetarian, not a meat-eater. And what he did! Such a perfect Jaina you cannot find anywhere, and what he did! He was taking the greatest drug. That’s why there was no need to smoke cigarettes – they are nothing. There was no need to drink because he was already drunk with power.
Those who watched Adolf Hitler said that when he started to talk, soon everyone felt that a transfiguration had come. When he started he was Adolf Hitler. By and by, he would become completely unconscious, as if mesmerized by his own talking; his eyes no longer showing any aliveness, as if he was not there, as if someone else had taken possession – possessed! His possession, his alcoholic state, his “moisture,” would immediately infect others. He could create madness very easily. He was so neurotic, and such a charismatic neurotic, that whoever came near him would become neurotic; he was a magnetically neurotic man. His own alcohol was overflowing, and people would become intoxicated – that’s how he led the whole German race toward suicide.
Power is a drug, the greatest drug the world has ever known. This is beautiful because politicians are always against drugs and they are the greatest drug takers, on the greatest drug trip! You can also make your own private drugs. Take wealth; just look what happens when a person becomes rich – he is no longer there, completely absent! He does a lot, he works hard, but he doesn’t know what he is doing. He is completely unconscious. And private drugs: you can become a painter, a poet, and that can become your trip. Anything in which you forget yourself, in which you lose consciousness, in which you become so identified – anything you are doing where the witnessing is lost ? is a drug. And Heraclitus calls this the moist state:
Souls take pleasure in becoming moist.
No effort is needed, no strain, no facing reality. You simply hide. You hide, you escape, close your eyes, just like an ostrich. When your eyes are closed, you cannot see anything. You are happy; all this is what you call happiness. This happiness cannot last – it is momentary.
When you fall in love with someone, you feel very, very happy. This is a drug; a drug your hormones create within your body, a biological drug. Nature has to use it because nature cannot rely on you. Just think, if there is nothing like love, the world will cease – because sex is so ridiculous. If there is no love, sex seems to be just ridiculous! Who will want to experience sex if no intoxicant involved?
Love is just a bait. The real desire of nature is to reproduce. But you cannot be relied upon; if you don’t fall in love, you will not reproduce. You fall in love – nature is playing a trick. Nature is giving a drug and releasing it into your body. It has glands in the body where it releases the drug. It is a natural, biological, hormonal drug. That’s why whenever someone is in love, look at him, he walks differently. He is no longer here – completely absent, lives in the imagination, the desire, the dream, and does not live in reality. He has unknowingly drugged himself. After a few days, when the love is gone – because no drug can last forever – by the time the honeymoon is over, it is also over. You start facing reality and there is trouble because whatever you promised, you promised when you were not conscious. Now you have to fulfill promises given in a moist state, given in a state of unconsciousness. Now you have to fulfill those promises; now the burden grows. Why does every love affair become ugly in the end? Why does every marriage end up on the rocks? – because it is not a conscious phenomenon. If you love consciously love can be eternal because with consciousness everything is eternal. With unconsciousness everything is momentary.
If you love consciously and are not a victim of biological tricks, not a victim of nature, but a conscious love, you don’t fall in love, you rise in love. Love itself becomes an integrating force, not a disintegration. Love itself becomes an awareness; you become more and more aware in relationship. You care for the other, you don’t use the other. You care and share, you don’t possess. You liberate the other, and through the other’s liberation you liberate yourself. You become two partners in an ultimate journey. You help each other because there are pitfalls; the path is long and the journey is eternal. It is very good to be with someone who can share every anguish, every pain, suffering, bliss, every moment of silence; with whom you can communicate and say what is happening to you. Someone whom you can rely on to be helpful whatever happens to you, who will love you in whatever situation you are in – good or bad, angry or happy, sad or blissful. You need not hide anything with someone you love; you can remain open and vulnerable. Whatever the situation the love is unconditional; it doesn’t depend on conditions.
A conscious love is a totally different phenomenon. It happens rarely, but whenever it does happen it is one of the most beautiful things that is possible in this world.
Ordinarily your love is just a drug. I witness it every day. A couple come and say that they are deeply in love, a week passes and they come again – they say everything is falling apart. Just a week! Just a week before you could not have imagined it – their eyes, their faces were radiant with love, their bodies were filled with something unknown; they were intoxicated. Just in a week, everything is finished! What type of love is this? ? it is not love at all. You have been doped by nature; nature has played a trick on you.
Nature wants you to move into sex. It creates a dream world around it because sex in itself is ugly. It is really ridiculous! Just think, you are in a sexual relationship with someone without love. It is simply ugly. That’s why prostitutes are ugly. However beautiful their bodies, they cannot be beautiful because the very act, without love, makes their whole life ugly, dirty. You can tolerate sex only because of love. Sex looks beautiful because of love; otherwise, the postures, the gestures of sex, are all ridiculous. But when you are drugged you are not aware of what is happening. When you are drugged you never look at yourself. The whole world looks ridiculous, not you.
It happened…

Mulla Nasruddin went to be psychoanalyzed. When he went in to see the psychoanalyst, he was asked a few questions; just a test to know what type of person he is. He drew a line and asked Nasruddin, “What does it remind you of?”
Nasruddin replied, “Of course, a beautiful woman!” A line! The psychiatrist was a little puzzled.
He drew a circle and asked, “What does this remind you of?”
Nasruddin replied, “Of course, a beautiful woman in the nude.”
He drew a triangle and Nasruddin closed his eyes and said, “No, no, no, don’t do this!”
The psychoanalyst asked, “But what does it remind you of?”
He replied, “This woman is doing something very nasty.”
So the psychoanalyst said, “You seem to be very preoccupied with sex.”
Nasruddin said: “What! Me? I am preoccupied with sex – or you? Who is drawing these nasty figures on the paper? You or me?”

You can see the whole world, but you cannot see yourself. This is the state of moisture: when you are completely unaware, oblivious of who you are, what you are doing, why are doing it.
When you start meditating you become very, very confused in the beginning because for the first time you become aware of what you are doing. Why are you doing it? And for what reason? You were not aware before. You feel very confused because for the first time your eyes are opening toward reality. By and by, if you don’t escape you feel that you are cracking – not only confused, you are going mad! You have always been mad, but you were not aware. Now you are becoming aware and the madness has to be faced. If you don’t face it, you cannot grow. Escape is not growth and all dimensions of intoxicants are escapes. When you are in an unconscious state, you may believe that you are doing something meaningful, but that is a sheer belief, ungrounded. When you become conscious, you come to know that what you have been doing is simply nonsense. It has not led anywhere. Whatever you believed you were just befooling yourself.
I have heard…

Mulla Nasruddin knocked at the door of a tavern at three o’clock in the morning. The owner of the tavern looked down from an upstairs window, very angry of course, and said, “Go away, whoever you are! This is not the time and you can’t get a drink.”
Nasruddin replied, “Who has come to get a drink? I am here to get my crutches. I forgot them at closing time, and as you and the whole world knows, I cannot walk without them. Now I have to return home so give my crutches back!”

He has always walked on crutches, not knowing that he can walk without them – believing only in them. Unconscious, he had left the crutches in the tavern, and he had been wandering around the town the whole night. Now, as he is returning to consciousness, he asks for his crutches back because as he says, “The whole world knows that I cannot walk without crutches.”
Your beliefs are your crutches. You cannot walk without them, you cannot live without them. You cannot think of how you will be without your beliefs – they are your crutches. When you become aware, you simply cannot think of how you existed in such a state of affairs for so long.
But in a moist state of mind, things happen. You are not in control of anything. They just go on happening and you go on reacting. A woman laughs at you, and you are in love. You start talking to her and appreciating her, and because you appreciate her, she starts falling in love with you. Now the hormones have started functioning. Now you are on a drug trip. Soon you will become aware and you will have to come out of it. When you come out of it again, it is painful. You cannot tolerate the pain, it is too much, intolerable. Sooner or later, just to console yourself, to intoxicate yourself again, you will find another woman. And the same circle goes on being repeated. A man who is drugged can believe anything.

I once asked Mulla Nasruddin, “Is your new relationship with the banker’s daughter growing?” I know the banker and I know the daughter, and it seems to be a difficult relationship, almost impossible. But Nasruddin beamed very happily.
He replied, “Yes, recently there are signs, hints, indications. Things are falling in line.”
So I asked, “What has happened? Has she started smiling at you or something?”
He said, “No, not exactly that – but last night she said, ‘I am saying no to you for the last time!’”

When one is drugged, one has one’s own interpretations. “I am saying no to you for the last time!” When you are not conscious you don’t know what yes means, what no means. You don’t know anything, you simply drift. This drifting state is the state of moisture.
A drunken man has to be led by a young boy, whom he follows stumbling and not knowing whither he goes, for his soul is moist. Souls take pleasure in becoming moist. You all take pleasure in becoming moist because that is the easiest thing to do. That’s the only pleasure in it – the easiest. You needn’t do anything, you simply leave yourself and drift. You fall toward the earth and gravitation pulls you down. And you feel very, very happy because no strain, no effort – nothing!
People come to me and say that they cannot get up early in the morning for the meditation. Even that much effort is too much for you. If you cannot get up early in the morning to meditate, what else can you do? What else do you think you can do? You don’t want to make any effort – but your demands are very high. Even a man who cannot get up early in the morning to meditate asks, “How is peace of mind possible?” and, “How will I come to know God?” and, “Help me! I don’t want to come again to this world.” But nobody comes to this world. If you live in a drifting way, if you always live falling downward – choosing the easiest, the path of least resistance, the path of no challenge, no struggle, nothing, just falling, living on the gravitation – you need not make any effort to come. There is no need to come, you will be coming because this is how one comes into this world; a moist state of mind will always revolve around this world. Only a dry soul can fly toward the sky because there is no effect of gravitation on a dry soul; the downward pull doesn’t exist for a dry soul. What is the meaning of being dry? ? the meaning is, keep alert. Whatever you do, do it knowingly – whatever! I don’t say, “Don’t do this and don’t do that.” Whatever you do, be simply more alert. By and by, every act helps you to become more and more dry, and a detachedness comes to you. With alertness you automatically become detached.
You love a person, but still it is not an attachment. You love a person, you care, you share your being, you give everything, but still it is not an attachment. It is very, very detached. When there is a detached love, there is nothing like that – it is the most beautiful flowering. Love and detached; it means it comprehends both the polarities. It is paradoxical. You can be detached without love, or you can be in love without detachment. That’s easy, to choose one extreme, one polarity. To choose both the polarities together – detached and in love ? what does it mean? It means you are alert. Doing whatever needs to be done, but remaining alert, you are detached. You can live in this world without being a part of it. You can be in the world and the world will not be in you.
This dryness comes as you more and more close the ways of falling asleep, you close the doors of falling downward, you close the doors of pleasure – you don’t seek pleasure. Remember, happiness is not pleasure. Happiness is a different phenomenon – it is a state of being.
Pleasure is forgetfulness, happiness is remembrance.
When remembrance becomes absolute, when remembrance is so absolute that there is no possibility of falling down from it, bliss arises. Between bliss and pleasure is happiness.
Don’t ask for pleasure because if you ask for it, you will become a victim of the downward drift, the gravitation. Look at a person who is addicted to food; when he eats, just watch him. You will see that he is completely unconscious – because how many times, millions of times, has he decided not to eat too much? When he eats again, he forgets or rationalizes: “Just one more time ? next time I’m not going to eat so much.”

Mulla Nasruddin was dieting and the doctor had said, “Now, this is the last time. If you don’t listen to me you can be certain that you will have to leave the body. You are going to die because your heart cannot carry the burden anymore.” He had had two heart attacks already.
The next day he was eating as much as four men would find more than enough. Suddenly, he looked at his wife and said, “What are you doing, sitting there? You don’t have even that much will to stop me from going off my diet!”

The wife – even for that she is responsible; she doesn’t have that much willpower to stop him!
Nobody can stop you. Nobody’s will can be of any help to you. Rather, on the contrary, it can be destructive. If someone stops you too often, you start going against it, you react. The upward flow cannot be forced by anybody. This is a very subtle and delicate phenomenon to be understood; if people carry on trying to make you good from all sides, they will force you downward because your ego will feel a resistance. This is very delicate because those who want to help you toward the height cannot force you, they can only persuade you. This is all that I am doing. Sometimes I even see that this can be stopped, but I cannot stop it. I see that you are taking a step downward. I can talk to you, I can make you aware and say, “Stop and much will happen,” but that cannot be said because if I say too much, I will help you to go downward. You will take the step even sooner – because your ego will come in. I can only persuade you. I can divert your mind. I can give you something to play with so that you forget that you were going to take a step there – your mind is diverted. But I cannot say, “No, don’t take that step.” If I say, “No,” it is almost certain that you will take that step.
This is the problem. A master has to persuade you. This has become more and more difficult in the modern world. In the old days it was easier because people were taught to be obedient, now they are taught to be rebellious. In the old days people were taught to be disciplined, now they are taught to be undisciplined. To be undisciplined now is something very meaningful; to be disciplined now is just to be part of the establishment. To be disciplined is to be square, to be undisciplined is to be a revolutionary.
In the old days it was simple because the master could have said, “No,” and he could have relied on it that the no would do. A simple no can save you many lives of unnecessary struggle. But now it is impossible, now it is difficult. You have to be persuaded in such an indirect way that you never feel that you are being persuaded. You have to be diverted in such a subtle way that you don’t become aware that you are being led somewhere. Even if you become aware that somebody is guiding you, you resist – you do just the opposite. This creates a very new phenomenon in the world, this is something new in the modern age. That’s why to achieve the ultimate has become more and more difficult – an unnecessary wastage of energy. I can see, I am seeing, that you are taking a step in the dark, that you will fall down, will be crippled, but even then I cannot say, “Don’t take that step,” because you won’t listen. If I say no you will feel more attracted toward it.
That’s how Adam fell. God said, “No, don’t eat the fruit of this tree!” And he had to. He fell because God said no. Now, if God creates another Garden of Eden, he is not going to commit that mistake again. On the contrary, it will be good to say, “Only eat the fruit of this tree, and all other trees are prohibited.” Then Adam will not be tempted, he will not go toward that tree. The modern Adam particularly is in an absolutely chaotic state of consciousness – much too moist, falling like a dead weight, falling continuously toward the valley, the downward flow. Of course, pulling upward will need effort.
Souls take pleasure in becoming moist.

A dry soul is wisest and best.
The whole of wisdom consists in becoming a dry soul. But try to understand that dry doesn’t mean that you become insensitive; dry doesn’t mean that you become uncaring; dry doesn’t mean that you become aloof, indifferent – no. Dry simply means that you become aware. You care, you have a deep concern, but this concern never becomes an anxiety. You care. You do for others as much as you can – for your wife, friend, daughter, son, your husband, father, mother. Whatever you can do, you do totally. That’s all. Whatever happens, you accept it. There is no frustration. If you do everything possible, what is the frustration? There is no frustration. You don’t feel worried that you should have done this or that. No, you have done everything – it is finished! You come clean out of every relationship, not dirty.
But ordinarily, if the soul is moist, after every relationship you come out dirty. The relationship doesn’t cleanse you, it makes you dirty. It is not really the relationship that makes you dirty, it is your moisture. It is just like when you go for a walk and your clothes get wet – when you return you will be very, very dirty because the dirt will cling; not because the road was dirty but because your clothes were wet. The same happens inside; if your soul is moist, whatever you do, you come out of it dirty because all dirt clings to it. If you are dry nothing clings. The dust is blowing about, but it cannot cling to you. Buddha lives in the same world as you do, but every day you feel that you are becoming dirty. Buddha remains fresh, as if he has just taken a bath, clean. The cleanliness depends on dryness, and dryness comes the more you become aware.
When you are aware, you become like a flame inside. The flame goes on burning; even when you are asleep, the flame burns. Ordinarily, even when you are awake, you sleepwalk. But when the flame is burning and you are alert, alert to every moment, alert to the whole of what is happening all around; alert – not in a concentrative way because if you concentrate you become alert to one point and you become unconscious of the whole thing. Just alert, an opening, all doors open, all dimensions open, you are simply alert, even while sleeping the doors remain open and the fresh air goes on flowing. Deep down a flame burns in you and that flame dries all moisture, all unconsciousness. This is the meaning of being enlightened; not achieving some god – there is none, no somebody waiting for you. Rather, it is becoming a god oneself because when you are aware, you are a god; when you are perfectly aware, you are a perfect god. God is the absolute dry state of being.

And if you become even a little dry – A dry soul is wisest and best – you start becoming wiser because all foolishness consists in being unconscious.

There was a case against Mulla Nasruddin in the court, and the magistrate said, “What? You ? again? I wasn’t expecting you this time. First you came for a parking offence, then for fast driving, then for faulty brakes, then for faulty night lights, then for drunken driving. Now what have you come for? Because last time I revoked your driving license!”
Nasruddin looked shamefacedly at the ground and said, “Jaywalking, your honor.”

A car isn’t needed. If everything is taken from you so that now you think, “I am unconscious because of this,” that won’t help – then you will be found jaywalking. You will do something else because you will remain the same. People think that they are entangled in the world because of their wives. They leave their wives and escape to the Himalayas – but this is just revoking the license. It won’t help because you cannot escape from yourself. You will remain the same in the Himalayas and you will create the same situation again. Your wife was there because of you. You will find another one, you will find something else, and the same problem will arise. A dry soul is needed. That is the Himalaya: the dryness, the alertness.
Whatever you do, make it a point not to do it in a sleepy way. Watch every act, thought, feeling. Watch and move. Every moment is very precious – don’t waste it in sleepiness. If you use every moment as an opportunity to become more conscious, by and by consciousness grows. Suddenly, one day, you find that the light is burning inside. If you work hard toward it, suddenly one morning you rise a completely new man – dry, unattached; loving, but not in any way involved; remaining in the world and yet a watcher on the hills. This is the paradox that has to be fulfilled: remaining in the world and yet watching from the hills; simultaneously being in the world and not being in it. This is the wisest and the best soul. You have the potentiality. Just as every seed can become a tree, you can become a Buddha, a Heraclitus, a Jesus. But you have to work hard for it. A lukewarm effort won’t do. You have to boil completely; one hundred degree heat and evaporation happens.
Water is moist, flows downward. Heat is dry – with heat even water flows upward. With the flame of awareness even all that you have been thinking is wrong will become right. Love seems to be an entanglement, an imprisonment; with awareness that becomes a liberty, a freedom. Anger without consciousness is a destructive force, a suicidal force. It hurts you, by and by it kills you; it is a poison. With awareness the same energy is transfigured, becomes compassion. The same radiance comes to your face, but not in anger – in compassion. The same blood flows, the same chemistry happens in the body, but a new foreign element has entered and the whole chemistry changes.
That is how base metals are transformed into gold. With unconsciousness you are a base metal, with consciousness you will become gold, you are transformed. Just the fire of awareness is needed. You lack nothing else, everything is there. With the fire of awareness a new arrangement happens. You lack nothing, remember; you have everything that a buddha needs. Just one thing is missing – and that, too, is fast asleep within you. You just have to awaken it; just some effort to awaken, some effort to become more alert.
Remember, effort will be needed right now. Heraclitus believes in effort. Zen masters believe in no effort, Heraclitus believes in effort – but no effort is also an effort deep down because you have to attain the state of no effort.
In the West, much misunderstanding exists about Zen masters because they talk of no effort. But you see, a man has to be with a Zen master working hard for twenty years to achieve no effort. With Heraclitus effort is the base, and if you make real effort, automatically the no-effort follows. When you have done all, you become skilled in it. You become so skilled that there is no need to do it – it happens. If you try toward awareness, by and by there simply is no need to do anything about it – it is there, it is just like breathing. But as you are, Heraclitus will be more helpful than Zen masters. Zen masters came at the culmination of the Buddhist school. One thousand years of hard effort and the Zen masters flowered. Zen masters are just at the end of a long effort, of a long journey. The plant is absolutely ready and it flowers. There is no effort in flowering. What do you do? Nothing is needed; the tree is ready and it flowers by itself. But a long effort is needed to make the tree ready. Ask a gardener how much he has been working. Then you look at the flower and think: “No effort is needed. They come by themselves.”
Zen is the culmination of a long effort that started with Buddha. Heraclitus is just the beginning. This is a misfortune; the Greek mind completely missed Heraclitus, couldn’t understand him, and there has never been a culmination – the flowering never happened. The Greek mind follows a totally different path. It never listened to Heraclitus and the flowering never happened. The seeds were lost, they never sprouted. But that’s also why I have chosen Heraclitus – that will make the whole complete. I have been talking about Zen masters, but that can mislead you because that is the end. I must talk about Heraclitus so you can understand the beginning because there has to be a growth from the beginning to the end in you. You have to move from Heraclitus to Basho, from the seed to the flower.
Become a dry soul without becoming insensitive. If you become insensitive, you miss. You are simply dry without any awareness. The fire is not converted into awareness; the fire has simply dried you. That won’t help. Life automatically dries many people that way. Look at old people – they are dried. Look at a child – a child is moist. An old man is dry. Life dries all moisture out of him; just the struggle of life and he becomes insensitive, and to protect himself he becomes insulated. That is not the point. You have to be like a child – alive, elegant, graceful, agile – and yet dry like an old man.
There is a beautiful story said about Lao Tzu ? that he was already born an old man. He was eighty-two years old when he was born; he lived in his mother’s womb for eighty-two years. This is a beautiful phenomenon! It is said that he was born with gray hair – eighty-two years old, of course he would be! A child and yet not a child; very, very old, completely dry. From his very childhood he was aware. That is the meaning: that he was perfectly aware from the very beginning.
It is said about Buddha that when he was born, the first thing he did was to walk seven steps. The first thing! Must have been very old just out of the womb. He was born standing and walked seven steps with perfect awareness. His mother couldn’t believe this. The whole phenomenon was so absurd that it is said that she died simply out of shock. A story is told that whenever a buddha is born to a mother, the mother dies. It is too much, it is unbelievable; you cannot comprehend!
But these stories show something. They are not literal truths – they are symbolic, metaphorical. Never ask for history in the East. These people in the East never believed in history. They believe in myth and say that history is useless. What is history? ? just a compilation of newspapers, rubbish; old newspapers, that’s all. They never believed in history, they believed in myth. They say that myth is the essence; history is just on the periphery, just events. Myth is the very essence of all that exists at the center.
Be like a child and be like an old man – dry, all desires known, finished; all experiences known, finished; having moved all over the world, reached to yourself, at home at last. Sensitive like a child and dry like an old man. This is all that wisdom is about. This is how one becomes wise.
Enough for today.

============================================================

Although this Logos is eternally valid,
yet men are unable to understand it –
not only before hearing it,
but even after they have heard it.

We should let ourselves be guided
by what is common to all.

Yet, although the Logos is common to all,
most men live as if each of them
had a private intelligence of his own.

Human nature has no real understanding;
only the divine nature has it.

Man is not rational;
only what encompasses him is intelligent.

What is divine escapes men’s notice
because of their incredulity.

Although intimately connected with the Logos,
men keep setting themselves against it.

How can anyone hide from that which never sets?
The logos is the logic of the whole, the logic of existence itself; the logos is the ultimate law. It is the same as Lao Tzu calls the Tao, the Upanishads and Vedas have called the rit: the cosmic harmony where opposites meet and disappear, where two become one, where no polarity exists; where all paradoxes are dissolved, all contradictions disappear. What Shankara calls the brahman, Heraclitus calls the logos.
The human mind is logical and human logic is based on the polarity. It’s as if you are standing on a bank of a river and cannot see the bank on the other side. Whatever you think about the bank belongs only to the bank you are on, but the river flows with a bank on either side, it cannot flow with just one. The other may be hiding in mist, it may be so far away that you cannot see it, but the other is there. The other bank is not opposite to the bank you are on because deep down in the river they meet. They are one land and they both support the river like two hands or like two wings. The river flows between them and is a harmony of the two. You are standing on only one of the banks and cannot see the other, so you simply believe in the bank you are on. And you create a system which is based on the knowledge of it. When someone talks about the other bank you think he is contradicting you, you think that he is bringing something irrational, mysterious. The other is bound to be opposite because only the tension of the opposites can hold the river. But the oppositeness is not enmity, the oppositeness is a deep friendship; it is the peak of love.
This is the problem to be solved. If you can solve this you can understand Heraclitus and understand all those who have become awakened, who have known the other shore. Whatever they say will be contradictory because they have to comprehend both. They have to comprehend both winter and summer, day and night, life and death, love and hate, the peak and the valley.
When someone talks about the peak, not referring to the valley at all, his statements will be very rational; you can understand them, they are easy, consistent. When someone talks about the valley, never referring to the peak, he will also be rational. All philosophers are rational; you can understand them very easily. To understand them you need a little learning and training, that’s all, a discipline. But all the mystics are difficult to comprehend. In fact, the more you try to understand them, the more they become mysterious because they talk about the peak and the valley together. They would like to talk about the valley and the peak simultaneously.
It is said in the Upanishads, “He is far and near.” What type of statement is this? Either he is far or he is near. The seer immediately says, “He is far” and adds, “He is near.” He is the greatest and he is the smallest. He is the atom and he is the whole. He is within you and without. Heraclitus says, “God is summer and winter.” Summer? It’s okay; you can understand. God is only winter? That too is okay, you can understand. But both summer and winter? You feel dizzy and the mind says, “This statement is contradictory.”
Human logic seeks a noncontradictory statement – the logos is contradictory. It uses contradiction just as an architect uses bricks in opposition to make an arch. The opposition gives the tension and the strength, and on that arch you can erect a big building. But if you do not put bricks in opposition to each other – logical, consistent, just like a peak or a valley, this bank or that, not both – the building will fall; the arch cannot be made. It needs the tension of the opposites to create strength. Hence there is man and woman. They are the opposite bricks of life. Their very opposition creates the situation where life can exist. They are the two banks between which the river can flow. But the moment you talk about the peak and the valley together, it becomes incomprehensible. Human logic is consistent. The divine logos is contradictory, yet consistent.
Human logic is partial. It tries to understand a part and in trying to understand a part it avoids all that contradicts it. It simply wants to forget all that is contradictory. But the divine is all. It doesn’t choose, everything is involved. It is vast; it is not partial, it is total. That’s the difference between a religious and a philosophical approach. A philosophical approach is logical; that’s why Aristotle says, “Man is a rational being.” And Heraclitus says, “Man is irrational” – because your very reason makes you irrational. The moment you choose the part you have falsified the whole thing. Now this part is only in your mind. In existence this part is always with the opposite, never alone.
Human logic says that God is male. There are some believers in God who think that God is female, but the logos must comprehend both. So Hindus have a concept of ardhanarishwar: God is both male and female. That is the true concept from the logos. It looks contradictory. You must have seen statues of Shiva as half man and half woman, half feminine with one breast and half male. That statue looks absurd, but that is the truth. All your statues of God as male or female are irrational. They are not true because how can God be only male; where does the feminine arise from? To whom will the feminine reach? In what source does the feminine exist?
You talk about God as a he; that is wrong. There are people who talk about God as a she; that too is wrong. He is he plus she, but the mind cannot understand this and mental understanding is not an understanding at all. You will be able to understand only when you try to understand from your own totality, not just from the mind because inside you these two opposite poles meet. You are also an ardhanarishwar; you are both he and she. You are neither male nor female. If you understand your own totality and if you bring it to the universe, to face the universe, you will be able to comprehend. That’s a mystic vision. That is the logos.
So what to do? Ordinarily you are trained to be a man or to be a woman. From the very beginning we say to children, “You are a boy, so behave like one.” To a girl, “You are a girl, so behave like one.” That creates the distinction more and more and the poles are set apart. In a better world we will say to each child, “You are both.” The difference is only of emphasis. “You are neither boy nor girl. You are both.” The difference is only of emphasis. The whole concept of civilization will be different; there will be no question of enmity between man and woman. There will be no problem about who dominates whom. You will be able to see the totality of your being; the totality is beautiful. The part is always ugly.
It’s as if you have taken the tree and cut its roots. How long can the tree remain alive? You have taken the tree – the visible; you have cut the roots – the invisible. The tree goes upward and the roots go downward. You have made a consistent thing. You say, “No! How can these two opposite dimensions exist simultaneously? The tree must go upward and if the roots go downward they are two separate things. Cut them!” This is what has happened.
Man is a visible tree, woman is like the roots. That’s why all the old teachings say that woman is earth and man is sky. They are together; man is rooted in the woman and the woman is reaching higher and higher through the man. They are one. Hell and heaven are not two, just the same ladder.
Heraclitus says, “The way up and the way down are the same.” Hell and heaven cannot be apart. This is the logos: to see the whole ladder. God and the Devil are not two. Theologians will not agree because they will say that you are creating confusion and people will be confused; they will not know who is who. But people are confused and they are confused because of the false logic of the partial human mind. In fact, everything is everything.
It happened…

Mulla Nasruddin was awarding prizes at a local dog show, but he was very worried about something. He was worried about the way people were dressed. He exclaimed, “Look what’s happening in this world! Look at that person with two puppies. He has cropped hair, is wearing pants and smoking cigarettes. Now I’m at a loss as to whether that is a man or a woman, a boy or a girl.”
A bystander replied, “I know she’s a girl because she’s my daughter.”
Mulla Nasruddin said, “I am very, very sorry. Had I known that you were her mother, I would not have been so outspoken.”
The woman replied, “I’m not her mother, I’m her father.”

A meeting of the sexes is now happening. It’s happening in the way people dress, the way they live. That is a very good sign. People are becoming unisex in the way they dress; that’s a very good sign! There is no need to make these distinctions. The reality is a nondistinct whole.
Distinctions are being made by the mind and it has created trouble because you are both. If you are fixed on the idea that you are a male, what will you do with the woman inside? She is there. Sometimes she wants to weep and cry, but you cannot weep and cry. You are a man and you have to behave like a man. You don’t listen to nature; you listen to manmade theories that you are a man. Nature has created tear glands in the eyes and if nature intended that a man should never weep and cry, why create them? If nature intended that a man should not feel, why give him a heart?
A man feels as much as a woman. He suppresses his femininity and goes on suppressing it; that creates an inner conflict. Rather than using the opposite polarities to flow – rather than using the two opposite polarities as a tension, which creates aliveness – you suppress the polarity, which deadens and kills your sensitivity. If a man is not also a woman, one half is crippled, one half of his being is suppressed. And that suppressed being will take revenge. Sooner or later he will go mad because the suppressed part will throw off the dominating part.
Politics is not only outside; politicians have created politics within you. They have created a rift, they have made you fight yourself. And a woman is continuously suppressing the male part. It erupts. It comes up again and again because it is there. Rather than creating a harmony with these two opposite notes, you have been warring, you have been fighting, struggling. The situation would have been beautiful if you could have created a harmony; then a higher quality of being would have arisen within you. Remember, all growth is dialectical.
This word dialectical has to be understood; it is against rational. Reason is a linear process, from one step to another, but the plane remains the same; from A to B, but the plane remains the same. That’s why reason is very, very boring. It has no qualities of the opposite; that’s why it becomes boring.
Just watch: twenty men are sitting together and suddenly a woman enters. Immediately the atmosphere changes. Those twenty men were feeling a little bored; all those men together are bound to feel bored – unless they are homosexuals. If they are healthy they are bound to feel bored. A woman enters and immediately the atmosphere changes. You can see it on their faces; they start smiling, become more polite and don’t use ugly words. They behave themselves. A woman enters and everything changes. A subtle phenomenon happens inside: the entry of the woman becomes an even deeper entry inside of them, of their inner woman. They become whole. For a moment they are no longer parts. Look at twenty women sitting, chattering together, a man enters and immediately a change happens.
If there is only one, the same quality continues; it becomes a boring process. Dialectics means movement through the opposite. Dialectics is: thesis, antithesis, synthesis; one thing against another, a challenge, a tension. Through that tension and challenge a third reality arises, synthesis. The synthesis is always better; it goes on a higher plane.
Reason moves horizontally, dialectics moves vertically.
If you have no enemy and your life is such that you are not opposed to anything, you will lose all salt from your life. If you are not opposed to anything, you will be tasteless, you will be like a dead stone; not like a flower because movement, energy, challenge, comes from the opposite and you grow. When a man meets a woman a dialectical process starts. That’s why love is so very beautiful and a great growth situation. To be related to the other is to be constantly in a challenging situation. To be only related to oneself is boredom – no opposite.
One can move alone if you can find the opposite in your own inner being. That is the meaning of when a man becomes total within and doesn’t need a woman. When a woman becomes total within she doesn’t need a man. A moment comes when a Buddha moves alone, a Mahavira moves alone. There is no need of the other. Not that the woman is bad, but now they have found their inner feminine part, now the dialectics has entered their own being and there is no need to create it outside. Now, inside, there is a continuous thesis, antithesis, synthesis. Now they grow alone, but they also use the same dialectics.
The whole of life is dialectical. The logos is dialectical and reason is a process of the same. You can think of it in these terms. Dialectics is heterosexual; reason, rationality, is homosexual. Rationality is homosexual. That’s why homosexuality is growing in the West because the West has accepted Aristotle, reason. Heraclitus is heterosexual. He will include the opposite. If you listen to reason you will be homosexual. If you listen to reason, the whole quality that comes from the opposite, the tension, will be lost. When it is lost, life becomes boredom. When it is lost, life loses the zest, the enthusiasm, hope, possibilities. Everything is lost because every possibility is opened by the opposite.
When you fall in love for the first time, you meet the opposite. It is as if you have immediately got wings and can fly; poetry arises in your heart. What is happening? ? the opposite has created something in you. Silence alone is not very beautiful; sound alone is not very beautiful, but the meeting of sound and silence is very, very beautiful – that is music.
The meeting of silence and sound is music.
Watch what is happening when someone is playing an instrument, a sitar or a piano. What is he doing? ? he is doing a dialectical process. He creates sound and between two sounds he gives a valley, a silence. The greater the peak, the deeper the valley will be. He creates sound, he creates a peak; he moves higher and higher and higher and brings a climax and suddenly ? the gap, the silence.
You don’t have a musical ear if you listen only to sound and miss the silence between two sounds. When you listen to the sound and the silence, the peak and the valley together, you encounter a new phenomenon. Every peak creates the valley, every valley creates the peak. They move like yin and yang, they move in a circle. Then there is music, there is the hidden harmony.
The logos is dialectical, it is heterosexual. God creates the world because the other is needed. He alone cannot be, the world alone cannot be. If you listen only to the world you will not come to know the inner music of existence; being fed up with the world, you can leave it and only listen to God, but again you miss the harmony. When you listen to the world and God together; when the world becomes the opposite pole; when the world becomes one bank and God the other bank and the river flows – it flows tremendously, it flows beautifully and you hear the harmony. One who hears the harmony between this world and God is a sannyasin.
One who leaves this world and moves to the other extreme is logical, rational, but not dialectical. Go and watch people in shops, in markets; they are dull because they are only of this world. Somehow they are working, pulling and dragging because they are there. So what to do? They are doing something. But you cannot hear the music in them. The opposite: the prayer, the meditation, the silence is not there. That’s why the marketplace has become simply sound; it is a chaos.
Go to the Himalayas, go to the monasteries; the same shopkeepers who have left the world are sitting there. They, too, have no life; they are dull, dirt collecting on them, dead. You will find dead people in the shops, in the temples and monasteries. They are the same people, they have just moved to the other extreme. Harmony is missing in the market and in the monastery.
A man who is harmonious is complex, his simplicity is very, very complex because in his simplicity, the opposite is involved. He has deep compassion, but he can also be angry. He is absolutely detached, but he can also love; he loves and remains detached. In him, the valley and the peak meet. In him, sound and silence meet. If you have a musical ear and a heart, you will see the harmony in such a person. Such a person is rare because he himself has become a logos. Krishna, Lao Tzu, Buddha, Heraclitus, Jesus all live in the logos; they are miniature logoi. The working of their beings is the same as existence; existence mirrors the same in their beings. They don’t reject anything, they use everything.
A man who rejects anything does not know what he is doing. If a man rejects sound he will reject silence too because they exist together. Have you ever known silence without sound? Silence has its own sound. When the night is completely silent, with no traffic, no one moving around, everyone asleep; just watch and listen and you will find that the night has its own sound – very subtle, but its own sound. When one goes deeper inside, to the inner night, where all the sounds of the day have stopped, a sound is heard there too. Hindus have called it aumkar, the sound of the ultimate, om. It is heard. It is there. When the ultimate silence descends on you, the ultimate sound also descends on you – immediately! They are together, they cannot be apart. Silence and sound are two aspects of the same coin. Yes, God is silence and sound. This is the logos.
Now try to follow this sutra. This is very, very meaningful.
Although this Logos is eternally valid,
yet men are unable to understand it –
not only before hearing it,
but even after they have heard it.
This is not a question of hearing or not hearing. It is a question of inner growth. I can talk to you about the logos, I can try to explain it to you; you may even have an intellectual glimpse of it, but that will not give you understanding. It is just like talking to a small child about sex. You can talk, you can bring in all your Freuds and Wilhelm Reichs and the child may even listen, but can a child understand it? If the child is very intelligent he will understand intellectually, but to understand sex a biological growth is needed, a certain maturity of the glands and hormones is needed. To understand sex the child must come to the point where he desires it; only then can he understand, otherwise not.

I was walking down a street and two small children were walking in front of me. One must have been seven and the other about eight. The smaller one was telling the elder, “I walk to school with a girl. I have carried her bag and books seven times and brought her ice cream three times. Do you think I should kiss her now or not?”
The other pondered over it and said, “As I see it, you have already done enough for her. No need to do anything more.”

For a child, this is exactly the thing! You cannot talk about sex to a child. First the sexual desire needs to arise; the child should become sexual first. That is also the problem with religion. You cannot talk to anybody unless the desire arises.
Religion is just like sex. Sex is the desire to meet the opposite on the level of the body, religion is the desire to meet the opposite on the level of being. It is a desire. It is a thirst. Only when it arises can it be talked about. You may bring intellectual questions; that doesn’t mean anything. You may ask whether God exists or not; that is not the point. Are you thirsty? Has the desire arisen to meet the opposite on the level of being; not on the level of body nor of mind, but at the level of being, your totality? Are you ready for that jump? Then understanding is possible.
That’s why Heraclitus says: Although this Logos is eternally valid… The logos is present everywhere: in the trees, the stones, the sky, everywhere. The logos is present in you and all around you because the whole of life is working through the opposite. It is dialectical, it gets enrichment through the opposite. It moves through the antithesis and moves higher to the synthesis, then again the synthesis becomes the thesis. Again the antithesis is created and again a higher synthesis. Life goes on moving that way. It is that way everywhere. It is valid because it is not an argument; it is the way existence is.
Remember, Heraclitus is not arguing, he is simply making a statement. I’m also not arguing, I’m simply making a statement of fact. It is how things are. That’s why he says, “I have searched…” And he has found this dialectic, a dialectical process of existence. This is the deepest insight. It is valid. No question of arguing about it. It is the way existence exists. …yet men are unable to understand it – not only before hearing it, but even after they have heard it. Hearing won’t help. Unless you change, unless you become open to the inside, unless you not only try to follow intellectually, understand intellectually, but feel it, exist through it, to imbibe it like food and digest it so that it flows in your bones, it becomes part of your existence ? only then. These are not theories; you need an inner growth before you can understand it.
We should let ourselves be guided
by what is common to all.
If you cannot understand before hearing it and you cannot understand after hearing it, what is to be done? Heraclitus makes a very beautiful suggestion. It can become really helpful to you. He says:
We should let ourselves be guided
by what is common to all.

Yet, although the Logos is common to all,
most men live as if each of them
had a private intelligence of his own.
The logos is common to all; it is the common ground, the common continent. You follow your own intelligence and think of yourselves as islands, separate from everybody. Private intelligence is foolishness; that is the only foolishness possible, the greatest stupidity. Existence is total; intelligence too. It is of the whole, so you should look to the common.
That is what Zen masters say. They say, “Become ordinary, become common. Don’t try to become extraordinary.” The more common you become, the more ordinary; the more capable of understanding the logos. Don’t try to be very extraordinary, exceptional because the more you try the more you will become like an island, closed, caved-in upon yourself. You are losing your moorings in existence. You are cutting your roots, becoming uprooted. That has happened in the West ? a feeling of uprootedness. Nobody knows where his roots are. When you feel uprooted, you become an egoist and exist as a self-sufficient entity. And that is not possible!
Existence is interrelated, we move into each other. When I am talking to you, what am I doing? ? I am continuously moving in you. When you are listening to me, you are allowing and giving me a door. You breathe and existence enters you; you open your eyes and the sun enters you. Every moment, in twenty-four hours, you are a crossroad. Millions of points, millions of lines meet in you. You are not separate. Just think, can you exist separately? Can you exist totally insulated? You will die within seconds. You are a porous being; existence comes and moves through you. You are just like a room; air flows in, the sun comes and goes continuously and that’s why the room remains clean and fresh. If you are closed you will be dead. The more open you are, the more existence will flow through you; the more existence flows, the more you will be able to understand the logos.
You are not; the whole is. You are a false entity. Hence, the insistence on surrender from all the awakened ones. Don’t fight with existence because you don’t know what you are doing, with whom you are fighting. How can you fight with existence? It’s as if a wave is fighting with the ocean, a leaf is fighting the tree. It is foolish! Don’t try to move upstream; that will simply exhaust you. You will be tired and you will feel frustrated because you cannot succeed.
When you are against existence, there is no success. That’s why you and everyone else are such failures. Ask successful people; they are all failures. Deep down, they have missed. Ask your Napoleons, Hitlers, Rothschilds – they have all failed; they are failures. What have they attained? They fought, tried to move upstream, wanted to become extraordinary in some way or other and simply destroyed themselves. To try to become extraordinary is suicidal; it is a gradual suicide, a slow poisoning of the whole system. Surrender to existence, flow with it, wherever it goes – willy-nilly, wherever it goes.
This word willy-nilly is good. Willy means whether it goes according to your will or not; nilly means whether it negates you or not. Willy means will, and nilly means against the will. Willy-nilly, wherever it goes, you surrender, you float with it. Swimming, even swimming, is not needed.
Why have a private goal of your own? Why not move with the destiny of the whole? Why are you so worried about achieving something on your own? How can you achieve it? ? you cannot; this is simply not possible. Only the whole has a destiny, not you. Only the whole is going somewhere, not you. If you can surrender to the whole, everything is achieved because you become the whole and the whole’s destiny becomes your destiny. The goal of the whole is your goal. The goal is not somewhere else; the whole is happy right now, the whole is blissful right now. Only you are worried. Only you are worried because you are not flowing with the river. You are trying to cut small corners. Who are you and how do you think it can be possible? You will simply fail.
Man always fails, only God succeeds.
Listen: We should let ourselves be guided by what is common to all. Look to the commonness of things and find the common. The more common, the truer; the more exceptional, the more false. Be ordinary and you are nearer the ground, you are nearer the truth. If you can be absolutely ordinary, what else is needed? Every moment becomes such a benediction. What is the problem when you are absolutely ordinary? You eat and eating is a sacrament. You sleep and sleeping is a sacrament. You walk in the sun, what more do you need? You breathe; what else is needed to be happy? You love; what more are you asking? Everything is already given; you are just trying to be exceptional. Follow the rule, the common and don’t try to be the exception, otherwise you will be in misery.
Hell is for all the extraordinary people. They may be in politics, in art, literature. Hell is for all geniuses wherever they are; for all extraordinary people, all egoists. Ego is hell, it gives you suffering because you start unnecessarily conflicting with everything. You are never at ease and unease becomes your lifestyle; with the ego you will always feel unease. Ego is a discomfort; it is the nail in the shoe that continuously pinches, but you want to be extraordinary.
Then…

I was sitting with Mulla Nasruddin and his wife passed by and went out of the door. He said, “Look! There goes a great woman.”
I said, “What do you mean by ‘great’?”
He replied, “She is trying to wear a size four shoe on her size six feet. There goes an extraordinary woman!”

She is suffering, but trying to be exceptional.
In the past in China millions of women used iron shoes to make their feet small, so they would look extraordinary. These women suffered a long time, their whole life and became almost crippled. In China long feet belonged to laborers, the poor, not the rich. It seems life belongs to the poor, not to rich people. So the higher the status of the woman, the queen being the highest, for thousands of years the queens of China were not even able to walk because they had such small feet. It was impossible because feet are always in the right proportion to the body. You cannot have small feet because nature knows better than you. But they were trying to improve upon nature. They suffered a long time. The whole misery of man can be reduced to a single law: if you try to be exceptional you will suffer. Nothing will satisfy you; you will find discontent everywhere.

Mulla Nasruddin was ill and admitted to hospital. There he created a hell all around himself because you cannot find a greater complaint-maker than Mulla Nasruddin; he is simply a continuous complaint. The whole hospital was troubled – the nurses, the doctors. Just to get rid of him, they treated him as carefully as possible so he would quickly be okay and leave. He recovered and the day came for him to be discharged, but again he complained. The doctor heard his noise and asked the nurse, “Now, what is he complaining about? There is nothing to complain about. He’s leaving today.”
The nurse said, “Now he is saying, ‘How can I be cured before the medicines are finished? There must be something wrong.’”

This type of mind comes automatically to an egoist. He is always searching, finding something wrong. When you search, you will find and you will find more than you ask. This is the trouble in the world; whatever you try to find you will find. If you are trying to find something wrong – and the ego always tries to find the wrong because an ego needs continuous discomfort, it exists in discomfort. When everything is okay the ego disappears. Chuang Tzu says, “When the shoe fits, the body is forgotten, the feet are forgotten.” When everything is forgotten, how can you cling to the ego? The ego needs your shoe to continue pinching you so that you can remember who you are. That’s why an egoist cannot love, cannot meditate or pray because if he really prays, everything fits and the ego disappears. The ego means self-consciousness. When something is wrong, only then is there self-consciousness. When everything is right, there is no self-consciousness.
Look to the common, watch out for the common and don’t try to be exceptional. But we want to be exceptional. People come to me and if I say to them, “Sit silently and don’t be bothered so much about meditation and prayer; by and by it will grow.” They reply, “But, by just sitting?” They need something exceptional. If I say to them, “Stand on your head,” it’s okay.
That’s why all over the world, teachers who instruct people to stand on their heads are flourishing; something difficult, uncomfortable, appeals. People try ridiculous postures in the name of Yoga. Simply ridiculous! The more ridiculous, the better; the more difficult, so that you cannot do them, then the ego gets a challenge. So do them! Make absurd postures and think that you are doing something great. Life is simply great. There is no need to improve upon it. If nature wanted you to sit or stand on your head, you would have been created that way. Listen to nature, follow it and don’t create any conflict with it; just follow it and soon you will attain a deep silence which comes when one becomes ordinary.

Just a few days ago – in India it is a constant problem – a young man came and asked, “Should I get married or not?”
I replied, “Just be ordinary. Why not get married?”
He wasn’t willing because not marrying is something exceptional. Marrying is ordinary, becoming a householder and having children is so ordinary. He said, “But all great men have remained unmarried.”
I said to him, “If you want to be great, go somewhere else. To me that is a disease. If you want to be ordinary, only then come to me. Do whatever your nature and whatever your inner feeling wants.” Then I said to him, “Just look inside. Close your eyes and tell me what you would like.”
He replied, “Of course I would like to marry, but that looks so ordinary; wasting your life in ordinary things.”

But the whole of life consists of ordinary things. Greatness is not in things, greatness is in the quality that you bring to your life, to ordinary things.
Just look at Jesus having supper with his friends. He looks more ordinary than a Buddha sitting under the bodhi tree. But the gesture of being ordinary is so beautiful; drinking, eating with friends is so beautiful that nobody can be so beautiful just sitting under a bodhi tree. Jesus has a quality of being just ordinary.
Buddha remained a king even under the bodhi tree. He was born exceptional, extraordinary; he lived and was brought up as a prince. That became his structure. Even under the bodhi tree he is not a beggar. If you go near him you can feel it. You can miss a Jesus if you meet him on the road; you cannot miss Buddha. But I say to you, “Jesus is nearer the logos.”
It happened that way to Buddha because that was the way he was brought up; his past was just that way. But how many people can be born as princes and how many people can be taught that way? Jesus is more human. In all his humanity he is divine because this ordinariness is to follow the common.
Jainas and Buddhists come to me and say, “This Jesus drinks and eats like ordinary people; he stays with ordinary people. How can you say that he is of the same stature as Buddha and Mahavira?” I can tell you that he is exactly how one should be. Mahavira and Buddha may be exceptional, but not everybody can be exceptional and there is no need to be. It may have been natural for them, so it’s okay if they followed their nature. But millions and millions of people cannot sit under bodhi trees doing nothing. They will have to move, to work and do ordinary things in the world.
If there is no way to reach the logos ordinarily, it will remain only for a chosen few. That doesn’t look just; the whole existence seeming to favor only a few. Remember, if existence favors only a few, if it is partial, what’s the need to give you birth? No, nature never favors anyone; it is for all, for all those who are ready to partake. If you are ready to participate, then bliss is for all. Jesus is a carpenter’s son, a poor man. For millions of people that’s how it should be. Someone is a carpenter’s son, someone is a goldsmith’s son and someone is a shoemaker’s son. This is how life is! We have lived according to the exceptional people too much and because of that so much misery has been unnecessarily created.
Live ordinarily, find the common and don’t try to be uncommon; otherwise, with the very effort you will cut your roots from the logos. The logos is common to all, yet most men live as if each of them had a private intelligence of his own. If you live according to the common, if you follow the common and don’t try to become an individual, you will be nearer the logos and you will be able to understand it.
This is the paradox: those who try to be exceptional individuals miss; they miss all individuality and extraordinariness. Those who remain with the ordinary ? with such an ordinariness that there is nothing to claim about it and who never strive to be individuals ? attain the greatest individuality this existence can offer you. Those who remain ordinary become most extraordinary and that extraordinariness comes as a gift. It is nothing on your part, you have not been striving for it. Human nature has no real understanding; only the divine nature has it. Yes, it is as it should be.
We come from the whole, we go back to the whole. Unknown we come, unknown we go ? not knowing from where we are coming, not knowing to what we are going. The whole process is mysterious. How can you have a private intelligence? This is a little difficult and has to be understood very deeply. It is one of the most important points that Heraclitus has given. Consciousness is also common. Just as fish exist in the ocean, the common ocean, we exist in a common consciousness. Your consciousness and my consciousness are not two; just two centers of the same. All around you is consciousness. We are all forms, but within the forms flows the same, the one. That’s why sometimes you also feel a common ground.
Someone is sad; he hasn’t said a single thing to you. You are sitting next to him and suddenly you feel sadness spreading through you. Someone is happy, just happy, not saying anything to you and suddenly you feel happiness entering you. If twenty people are sitting happily together and you put a sad man amongst them, within minutes he will feel a change; his climate will change. Amongst sad people you become sad; amongst long faces you become a long face. Amongst happy people you become happy. That’s why if you enjoy playing with children you become a child again. You may be playing with a child and suddenly you forget all your worries and the world; you become like a child. It is very refreshing. How does it happen? ? it happens because consciousness is a common phenomenon. When you play with a child you have to become a child because you meet the child on common ground.
In the East, because of this, they have insisted that just being near the master, just being near an awakened one and being in the presence, is very, very valuable. In the West they cannot understand this: “What do you mean, ‘in the presence’?” In the East they say: “We are going for darshan.” Darshan means just to see the master; nothing to ask, just being in the presence. They have a certain word for this being in the presence, satsang: being near the truth. If you sit silently with a master, sooner or later you dissolve into each other. The consciousnesses meet. The master enters you, you enter the master. Just simply being near the master, not doing anything, not even making any effort ? one day you can attain. That too is possible, but you have to be very, very open. You can attain, just sitting silently, relaxing, not doing and not creating any barriers. Many have attained because consciousness is the ocean and we are the fish in it. Everything affects everyone else.
Whatever happens in this existence affects everyone else. Not only now; whatever has happened in the past is affecting us also. Not only that; whatever is going to happen in the future is also affecting us because the whole of existence culminates at this moment. Past, future, present, all culminate, converge.
There is no possibility of a private intelligence. Those people we call very, very talented, geniuses, they also feel it. Ask Einstein or Madame Curie, they also feel it. Einstein says that whatever he discovered, he discovered in moments when he was not, when something suddenly possessed him – the total consciousness. Ask the poets; they say that whenever something happens, they are not. They become a vehicle; the common consciousness possesses them.
Madame Curie received the Nobel Prize. It should have been given to the common ground. She was making so much effort to find a solution to a particular mathematical problem and she couldn’t find the way. She struggled and struggled for two years and one night, tired, she fell asleep. Something happened in her sleep; in sleep you are more open, you are not an egoist, you are a nobody and you don’t cling to the identity. That’s why in the morning you feel fresh again, younger, rejuvenated because you have been into the common ground. You moved into consciousness, the ocean. You were not clinging to the private intelligence. For a few seconds you dropped into the whole and the whole revived you, refreshed you.
During the night something happened to Madame Curie; she got up, went to her table and wrote down the solution to what she had been working on for years. She slept again and in the morning she had completely forgotten what had happened in the night. She took a bath, ate her breakfast, did everything and went to the table. She was simply amazed. The solution was there! But who had done it? There was no one else there. Only she was in the room. The servant had come in and couldn’t have done it. She had been working hard. “What’s happening?” She looked again in more detail. It was her own handwriting! A little different because in the night, in sleep… She closed her eyes and tried to remember what had happened. She saw the whole thing like a dream; she had something, so she got up and wrote it down.
You unnecessarily claim that common consciousness is yours. It has never been yours. It is always floating. It is all around you. Become more porous, become more allowing, a deep let-go because only the whole can understand the whole. How can the part understand the whole? How can an atomic part understand the whole? The whole can flow through the part and if the part allows it… That’s what meditation is all about, allowing the whole to flow and you disappear completely from the scene ? suddenly you have become the whole.
Human nature has no real understanding;
only the divine nature has it.

Man is not rational;
only what encompasses him is intelligent.
Not you, but the ocean around you, what encompasses. Not you, but what surrounds you, what is within and without you. Not you because “you” is just a fallacy.
Man is not rational;
only what encompasses him is intelligent.

What is divine escapes men’s notice
because of their incredulity.
You doubt, you cannot believe, cannot trust and that’s why what is divine escapes men’s notice because of their incredulity. There is only one barrier and that is doubt. There is only one gate and that is trust. If you trust nature, everything falls into its right place. If you distrust nature, everything is disturbed.
Why is it so difficult to be natural? ? there is only one difficulty. If you are natural you cannot be somebody. There is no other difficulty. Sex arises, you follow it; then brahmacharya, celibacy, becomes a fight against nature. You are hungry, you eat; fasting becomes a conflict with nature. When you don’t feel hungry, you force yourself to eat; that is also fighting with nature. You go against nature when you don’t feel like making love and you carry on doing it because the wife needs, because society says, this and that. Nature means just following the inner being, whatever it feels, without any imposition from your ego. It will destroy and shatter your ego.
Live like an animal with only one difference; be alert. That’s all. Live like an animal with only one difference; be aware. Don’t fight with nature; just be a witness and allow it. Wherever it leads, is good. All your goals projected from the mind are false. Whatever you do, you won’t succeed. Finally, nature succeeds because only the whole can succeed. So why move unnecessarily into a fight in the beginning? I see people fighting in millions of ways; they change extremes, but they fight.
In the past, in the East and also in the West, people were fighting against sex. They said that there is something wrong in sex because in sex you become natural like an animal and all the preachers have been saying that you should not be like an animal. What is wrong in being animal? Look at the birds, look at the animals; go to the forest and see them! Don’t go to the zoo because there you will not see real animals; they are corrupted by human beings. Go to the wild.
What is wrong with animals? They look so beautiful, nothing is ugly around them. All the moralists, all the so-called religious people, have been teaching you: “Don’t be an animal!” And your ego feels that this is a good goal. How can you be an animal? Sex brings total animality to you. In sex you feel so absolutely animal. You don’t feel like that in anything else because everything else you have changed, polished. You have painted, cultured, cultivated everything – everything! You eat, but you have made such a ritual out of eating and everything around it, that it doesn’t seem to be at all related with hunger. What you eat is not nutritious; it is a show, a facade. Everything is false, plastic flowers all around. But when you move in love, when you make love to a woman or to a man, you become absolutely animal.
You have tried to hide that too. That’s why man makes love at night. Only man makes love at night; otherwise, animals make love in the day. If you make love in the day, it will be deeper because when the sun is in the atmosphere you are more vital. The night is for rest, but man makes love at night because animals make love in the day and he has to make a distinction. What type of egoist effort is this? In the dark, not even with the light on because in the dark you don’t have to face the reality that you are behaving like animals. You don’t make any sound while making love. In fact, you make love as if something has to be done and finished as soon as possible; within seconds it is finished. You have been taught to be against it. Your ego feels good.
Now, in the West, the wheel has turned a complete circle. Since Freud and Wilhelm Reich, sex has been taught more and more. Now, a new thing is happening in the West; if you don’t make love one day, you feel guilty. It seems you have to feel guilty whatever you do. Before you were making love and feeling guilty. “Why do you make love? Why this animality? When will you transcend this? When will the day come when you will not need it?” Now in the West, if one day you don’t feel like making love because you feel tired, you feel guilty and feel that you are doing something wrong; you feel you have to do it. You have to do something, you cannot allow nature to make its own course. They are both the same to me, there is no difference.
In the past, women were not allowed to have an orgasm because how can a woman, so pure, have an orgasm? A woman is a goddess; she should behave like one. So in the past women were simply tolerating sex, just lying like dead bodies, corpses. Even if you make love to a corpse, the corpse will move a little, but not women – goddesses! They are so pure and innocent in nature, they don’t know what is happening; it is just the man who is dragging them into it. So they would lie down with closed eyes because even if a woman leaves her eyes open, that seems like she is curious, interested. Now, in the West, they have created the opposite. If a woman cannot achieve orgasm it is a problem, something is wrong. Now it is a sin not to achieve orgasm. Before, it was a sin to achieve orgasm.
In the past, in the East and in the West, women completely forgot that they could achieve orgasm. They completely forgot that a beautiful ecstasy is possible through sex; if you don’t move and if nature is allowed and movement is allowed while making love, lovers will go completely wild. They will scream, make noises, go mad; that is so animal-like. They will be so ecstatic. If you can be ecstatic in love, soon that ecstasy will open a door for a higher ecstasy. You transcend and the real brahmacharya happens. That is not anything you can force on yourself; that happens through nature itself.
If one follows nature, one reaches.
There is no need for you to make any arrangements for the ultimate goal to happen; nature has already made everything. You are a seed and if you allow nature, the whole blueprint exists in you. It is just like a seed: we sow the seed in the ground and it has the whole blueprint, the whole architecture of the tree. Every leaf that will be produced in the future, every flower that will bloom in the future. The seed has every blueprint in it – only nature has to be allowed.
You have to water it, take care of it; you have to give it good soil and fertilizers – finished! You need not do anything. You need not teach the seed to behave, do this or that or never say to it, “Never do this, otherwise you will never be a tree.” If you teach seeds, trees will not exist in the world because the seeds will go completely mad not knowing what to do. Seeds depend on the universal consciousness, not on a private intelligence.
Man has the blueprint to be a god, just to be a god, nothing less. Man is the seed of God because human consciousness is just the beginning. It has to grow and grow and come to a point where it becomes universal. Nothing is needed on your part. In fact, no discipline, creed, dogma, religion. Nature is enough. You simply have to allow it. You have to be receptive to it and move in trust because you can move only in trust.
If the seed asks, “What is the guarantee that if I leave my shell, which covers me and protects me, that I will grow into a tree? What is the guarantee? And if there is no guarantee I will cling to my shell.” Then what will happen? If the bird in the egg says, “How can I get out? Who is there to give me a guarantee that it will be a better world than I am already in?” What will happen? The shell is a security, it protects. The bird is beautifully protected in the egg, but this is not life. It is like death; of course completely protected, but protected in a grave. Who can give you the guarantee? ? there is no one to give you a guarantee; you have to trust.
The seed trusts and dissolves in the earth. It sprouts into a beautiful tree, flowers, enjoys existence and becomes ecstatic. The bird comes out of the egg, leaves the known for the unknown, takes wing and moves into the vast sky. Nobody knows what is going to happen. With no goal in view, with no purpose or plan, it just takes wing, feels ecstatic on the winds, moves, goes to the farthest corner of the sky and moves into the unknown.
That is how it is also going to happen to you. You are a seed, you are an egg; you are a possibility. Heraclitus hits it exactly right and comes to the exact point where you miss. What is divine escapes men’s notice because of their incredulity. Because you doubt, you miss. Trust and you can reach. Nothing else is needed; just trust, so that nature can unfold.
Although intimately connected with the Logos,
men keep setting themselves against it.

How can anyone hide from that which never sets?
Existence is always, always and always. It never sets. How can you hide from it? It lasts forever and ever. How can you fight it? What you are doing is simply ridiculous, absurd. It is stupid to fight. The only wisdom consists in a let-go, surrender. All that is beautiful starts happening. It is a happening, it is not a doing.
You can create barriers, but you cannot bring it. You can escape from it, you can close your eyes to it, but you cannot create it. It is already there, it is already the case. Only you are missing it because you are sitting with closed eyes ? the doubt closing your eyes, closing your heart – as if you are asleep, intoxicated in doubt.
Karl Marx has said, “Religion is the opium for the masses.” Exactly the opposite is the case. Doubt is the opium, not religion. Through doubt you miss the truth. Through trust you allow it to reach you and you allow yourself to reach it.
Meditate more and more on trust. Imbibe the feeling of trust. Vibrate with a trusting heart. Sing, dance, pray with a trusting heart and soon you will see that only trust pays finally. Doubt can kill. It is negative, it cannot give you life.
Doubt is death. Trust is life.
As the trust grows more and more, the more abundant life becomes available to you.
Enough for today.

============================================================

This universe,
which is the same for all,
has not been made by any god or man,
but it has always been, is, and will be –
an ever-living fire,
kindling itself by regular measures
and going out by regular measures.

The phases of fire are craving and satiety.

The sun is new each day.
There is no God as a separate creator of the world. There cannot be because the creation, the creator and the creativity are the same; they are not separate. Existence is one, so how can the creator and the created be separate? Existence itself is divine. There is no creator creating it; it itself is the creator, it itself is the creativity.
Heraclitus is a non-dualist. All those who have known are bound to know that duality exists because of the mind; the mind cannot see the one, it can only see the two. The moment it perceives anything, it divides. With the mind, the other is necessary. If it sees creation, it immediately thinks of the creator because how is creation possible without a creator? But if you encounter the creator with this mind, it will see that there must be some other creator; otherwise how can this creator be?
Mind is an infinite regress; it goes on and on dividing. That’s why the mind never reaches any conclusive state. Philosophy believes in the mind; that’s why philosophy never reaches any conclusion. One has to see the totality without bringing the mind in because the mind is the factor of duality; it divides. Division is the nature of mind. If you say “day” the mind immediately brings night because how can the day be without the night? If you say “love” the mind brings hate because how can love be without hate? If you bring life, the mind brings death because how can life be without death? But life and death are one. One phenomenon, one energy. Life is the manifestation of that energy and death is again relaxation. Life is coming to a form, death is moving into the formless again. The end and the beginning meet. Life is not separate from death, death is not separate from life; they meet and mingle. Even to say that they meet is not right because the mind immediately comes in and says that if there is a meeting there must be two. It is not a meeting, it is one phenomenon.
Heraclitus says desire and satiety are two phases of fire. You feel hungry, you eat and you feel satisfied. Have you ever noticed that hunger and satiety are one? They have to be one because the same thing, food, changes both. Food becomes a bridge between hunger and satiety, desire and desirelessness. If they are really separate they cannot be bridged. If they are really different there is no possibility of any bridge. Hunger will remain hunger and satiety will remain satiety. Where and how will they meet? But they meet. The mind thinks hunger is against satiety. Just try to understand it. Move a little deeper in it. The mind says that hunger is different from satiety, but when you are satisfied again a circle has started which will bring hunger; when you are hungry a circle has started which will bring satiety. Are they two or just a single phenomenon? When you eat, hunger disappears, but the moment hunger disappears a new circle starts.
A new morning is a beginning of the evening. A new birth is a beginning of death. You cannot see so far away. Every morning you become hungry, you eat and you become satisfied. In the evening you are hungry again; you eat and achieve satiety and never see that they are both one. One helps to bring the other. Can you be satisfied if you are never hungry? Is there a possibility of satiety if you are never hungry? If you are never hungry, don’t think that you will be in a state of satiety; the satiety cannot come without hunger. If there is no morning, don’t think that there will always and always be evening. There will be no evening at all. If there is no death, don’t think that there will be life eternal; there will be no life at all because death creates the situation, sets an energy phenomenon. Every life brings death, every death brings life again.
To the mind, these appear as two because the mind cannot see through opposites. When you don’t see from the mind, from the logical standpoint; when you simply look into the phenomenon itself, the totality of it, the two disappears and only one remains.
That is the thing with God as creator and the universe as his creation. Not only are ordinary people deceived by the mind, great theologians are also deceived by it. They say, “God created the world.” This statement is juvenile, it is childish. Nobody has created existence; it is, it is simply there because if you bring in creation, millions of problems arise. That’s why theology brings more problems and no solution. They create a theory, a hypothesis, to solve many problems. Nothing is solved. On the contrary, new questions arise around the hypothesis. They tried to solve the problem of existence by bringing God in, that he created it. They created millions of problems and have not been able to solve them. Once you start on the wrong track you go on missing because one thing leads to another. There is a relatedness; if one thing is wrong, it will lead to another wrong proposition. Unless you start from the very beginning toward the truth, you will never reach because the beginning is the end.
Theology brings in God to solve a few problems because there are problems such as, “Who created the world?” The curiosity arises and says, “Such a beautiful phenomenon! Who created it?” The mind has an itching sensation that it should be answered. “Who created it?” The first thing is to ask whether the question is right. Never raise a question without asking first if the question is relevant. What’s the criterion for a question being relevant? If a question is such that whatever answer is given, the same question can be raised again, the question is irrelevant, it is not right.
You ask, “Who created the world?”
Someone replies, “God.”
You can ask the same question again, “Who created God?” The question hasn’t changed, not a bit. The same question is still relevant. So someone replies, “God A created the world,”
You ask, “Who created God A?”
He says, “God B created God A,”
You ask, “Who created God B?”
He says, “God C created God B.”
The question remains the same so all the answers are false. If the question isn’t changing a little bit, you are not progressing toward truth at all. If all the answers to a question are false, please meditate on the question again. The very basis of the question itself must be wrong; otherwise how can all the answers be wrong? At least one answer must be true, but no answer has proved to be true. Hindus, Mohammedans, Christians have all provided answers, but the question remains. Thousands of years working on the question, “Who created the world?” and not a single answer has been given which satisfied. This means that at the very base, from the very beginning, you have taken the wrong line of research, the wrong attitude. So the first thing is to question the question itself, whether it is relevant.
Who created existence? This question is irrelevant for many reasons because then the question is possible, “Why did he create it? What was the need? Why couldn’t he live without creating it? What desire possessed him? And if God created this universe, why is there so much misery and suffering which cannot be accounted for?”
Why is a child born crippled, blind, ill? If God is the creator, can’t he correct the pattern of the world? Or is your God a little neurotic, enjoys suffering? A sadist, who enjoys this torture? Millions of people dying in a war, being killed, thrown into the fire and gas chambers; he is the creator and he is simply not worried! He can’t even stop a Hitler unnecessarily killing millions of Jews, for no reason at all. What type of creator is this? If God created the world, he must be a Devil because the world doesn’t seem so good. It cannot come out of good and seems to be inconsistent with good. God means “the good” and this world doesn’t show any sign of goodness; just exploitation, violence, war, killing, misery, anguish, tension, madness. What is the reason of this creation? If God is responsible, he is the greatest criminal.
These problems arise and theologians cannot solve them. They have to create more false theories. They say that there is a Devil and it is his work; they fall into their own trap. First they create the God that created the world and then they have to create a Devil because they cannot explain the world through goodness. The world looks so evil that they have to create a Devil. Then the question arises, “Who created the Devil?” They go on and on and get into such a desertlike effort which leads nowhere. Nobody reads their big volumes on theology – nobody! When you start you reach nowhere and they go on and on and on. It seems like a broken gramophone record; they go on repeating the same thing, you go on asking the same question and they go on round and round. All theology is beating about the bush. Not a single problem has been solved. Theology is the most useless effort that man has ever made. It starts with, “God created the world.”
Men like Heraclitus, Gautam Buddha, Lao Tzu, Zarathustra, don’t talk about these things. They simply say, “Existence is God. Nobody has created it. No creator is responsible for it, so don’t raise unnecessary questions. And don’t unnecessarily waste your time in answering.” Existence is and God is not separate from it. God is existence, the totality, not a separate being, a person – the totality. It comes out of its own and dissolves.
Heraclitus says, “It is fire.” Fire is a beautiful symbol. It gives you a very dynamic energy and indicates that existence is a dynamic, dialectical energy; it moves on its own. When you say “energy” it means something. When you say “God” you have moved into something which will not lead anywhere.
Energy is truth.
You can feel it here and now. You are energy, the birds singing in the trees are energy, the trees reaching toward the sky are energy; the stars moving, the sun rising every day. Everything is energy. Energy is neither good nor bad. It is always neutral. So there is no need to create a Devil, no need to explain anything; energy is neutral.
If you are miserable, it is because of you, not because of a God or a Devil. If you are miserable, you are behaving wrongly with the energy. If you move with the energy, you will be happy and blissful. If you move against it, it is you who are responsible. Remember, if there is no God, you are responsible for whatever happens. If you are responsible there is a possibility to transform oneself. If God is responsible, how are you going to transform yourself? God seems to be a trick of the mind to throw responsibility on someone else because the mind is always throwing the responsibility on someone else. Whatever happens, you always throw the responsibility on someone else. If someone has insulted you and you are angry; he has created the anger not you. If you are sad, someone else is making you sad and unhappy. If you are frustrated, someone is blocking your way. Always someone else is responsible, never you. This is the attitude of the mind: to make someone else responsible and you are freed of the responsibility. This is why you are miserable.
The responsibility is yours. If you take it as yours, you can do something about it. What can you do if it is someone else’s? If others create the sadness, you will always remain sad because what can you do about it? There are millions of people all around and if they make you frustrated then nothing can be done. You will remain frustrated and this is your destiny because how can you change others?
If you are responsible, you become a master immediately. Now you can do something. You can change yourself and your attitudes. You can look toward the world with a different attitude and if you feel miserable, somewhere you are a misfit in the total energy system. That’s all that sin means: you are a misfit, not knowing how to move in this total energy system. The energy system is neutral. If you follow it you will be happy. If you don’t follow it, you will be miserable. This is the logos, the rit, the Tao.
For example, if you are feeling thirsty and you don’t drink water, you will be miserable because in this energy system water gives you satiety and the thirst disappears. If you are feeling cold, you move near a fire because in this energy system the fire is the source of all warmth, heat. If you move away from a fire when you feel cold, you will be miserable. Nobody is responsible. If you feel thirsty, hot and move near a fire, you will be in hell!
I have heard…

A man, a great sinner, died. Everybody knew that he was going to hell. It was so certain, obvious, no question about it. He was a great sinner, but also a very great leader. He was a very rich man because sin can be very successful; it pays in this world.
Thousands were following him; everyone being fully aware that he was going to hell, but he was still a very powerful man. As the procession was heading toward the cemetery, by accident a truck loaded with coal came on the road and started following the procession. The truck was taking its own route, but it collided with the procession.
Mulla Nasruddin, who was in the procession, exclaimed, “I was absolutely certain that this man was going to hell. But I could never have imagined that he had to provide his own coal!”

Hell is fire, hot. But I tell you that you are providing your own coal. This is how things are; if you move against nature you will be in misery. Misery means moving against nature and if you understand it, misery is a good indication. It shows that somewhere you are going wrong, that’s all. Put things right! Misery is a help. Anguish, anxiety, tension, are indications that somewhere, something is going wrong. You are not with the total. Somewhere you have started your own private movement and you will be in misery. Heraclitus says, “Private intelligence is false.” Intelligence is with the whole. Don’t be too clever. You cannot be intelligent on your own. If you move with existence you will be intelligent, you will have a clarity of perception, you will be wise. If you move on your own you will be a fool.
An idiot is a person who is completely closed within himself, caved-in. He has no contact with the total energy system. That is his idiocy. A wise man is one who is not closed at all; the air flows through him, the cosmos flows through him. He has no barriers, no closed doors. He has no privacy of his being. He is porous. Whenever he feels miserable, he immediately makes use of the indication and puts himself right. It is a symptom. It is just like an illness where you are not behaving naturally with your body and some illness erupts. That illness is a friend. It is saying, “Behave, change your ways! Somewhere you are going against nature.” If you don’t eat for three or four days, feel dizzy, hungry, you feel sad. The whole body needs energy, so it is saying to you, “Eat some food!” Always remember, energy is neutral, so the whole quality of your being depends on you. You can be happy or unhappy; it is up to you. No one else is responsible.
When you feel hungry, eat; when you feel thirsty, drink; when you feel sleepy, sleep. Don’t force nature. For a little while you can force it because that much freedom is possible. If you want to fast, you can for a few days, but each day you will become weaker and weaker and weaker; each day you will be in more and more misery. If you don’t want to breathe, you can stop breathing for a few seconds, but only for a few seconds; that much freedom is possible. That’s not very much and if you don’t breathe well, soon you will feel that you are choking, having a dying sensation.
All misery exists as an indication to you that somewhere you have gone wrong, gone off the track. Come back immediately! If you start listening to the body, to nature, to your inner being, you will be more and more happy. Become a good listener to nature. Listen to the logos. Listen to those who have awakened to the logos and you will always find them natural. They don’t force anything, they don’t push the river. They simply flow with it; that is their blissfulness. There’s no God responsible.
We create God out of our own fear and necessity. We feel so helpless in our misery, so powerless, so impotent in our pain, that we create a God out of this fear. One to whom we can pray, to whom we can say, “Don’t give me so much trouble.” A God who we can praise and feel that if we praise him, he will become more and more favorable toward us. Do you think God can become prejudiced? If you pray, do you think he will be on your side? Or if you don’t pray, he will not be on your side?

A small child was being told by his parents, “If you don’t behave, God will punish you.” In the past the child had always been put right; whenever he was not behaving well, or doing something which the parents thought was not good and they had used this trick, “God will punish you; he will be angry.” And this had always helped.
This time the child laughed and said, “I’m not worried about God because he doesn’t know me at all.”
They said, “This is something new! You never said this before. Why do you think he doesn’t know you?”
The child replied, “For two weeks I haven’t prayed and nothing has happened. So either he thinks I’m dead, or he has completely forgotten me. So now there’s no need to be worried about it. Now I am free! Otherwise, two weeks and no sign from him?”

We have created God out of our need. God has not created you, you have created God. It is your need because you are helpless and you project everything that you miss on him. If you are powerless, you say that he is omnipotent. If you are ignorant, you say that he is all- knowing. If you are blind and move about and grope in the darkness, you say that he is omniscient. This is a trick of the mind. Whatever you miss in yourself you project on him and think the balance is recovered by saying, “Now I can pray to this omnipotent, omniscient, omnipresent being and he will help me.”
These are tricks. You can be helped only by yourself. Of course, nature will be with you if you are with nature. No other prayer will do. This is the only prayer. To me, prayer is a feeling, a flowing with nature. If you want to talk, talk, but remember, your talking is not going to affect existence. It will affect you and that may be good, but prayer is not going to change God’s mind. It may change you, but if it is not changing you then it is a trick. You can go on praying for years, but if it doesn’t change you, drop it, throw it away; it is rubbish. Don’t carry it any more. Prayer is not going to change God. You think that if you pray, God’s mind will change; he will be more favorable, he will be tipped a little toward your side. There is nobody listening to you. This vast sky cannot listen. This vast sky can be with you if you are with it; there is no other way to pray.
I also suggest you pray, but praying should be just an energy phenomenon; not a devotee and God phenomenon, but an energy phenomenon. You simply become silent, you simply open yourself. You raise both your hands toward the sky, palms uppermost, head up, just feeling existence flowing in you. As the energy, or prana, flows down your arms, you will feel a gentle tremor. Be like a leaf in a breeze, trembling. Allow it, help it. Let your whole body vibrate with energy and just let whatever happens happen. You will again feel a flowing with the earth. Earth and heaven, above and below, yin and yang, male and female; you float, you mix, you drop yourself completely. You are not. You become one ? merge. After two to three minutes, or whenever you feel completely filled, bow down to the earth and kiss it. You simply become a vehicle and allow the divine energy to unite with that of the earth.
These two stages should be repeated six more times so that each chakra can become unblocked. You can do it more times, but if you do less you will feel restless and unable to sleep. The best time to do this prayer is at night, in a darkened room, going to sleep immediately afterward; or it can be done in the morning, but it must be followed by fifteen minutes’ rest. This rest is necessary, otherwise you will feel as if you are drunk, in a stupor.
This merging with energy is prayer. It changes you. When you change, the whole of existence changes because with your attitude the whole of existence changes for you. Not that existence changes –existence remains the same – but now you are flowing with it and there is no antagonism. There is no fight, no struggle; you are surrendered to it. Otherwise, all things are tricks ? and man goes on inventing.
I have heard…

A rabbi came to a village on his horse. He was on his way to some other town and was very tired. He wanted a little rest, so he went into an inn leaving his horse under a tree with some hay to eat and to rest on. Mulla Nasruddin was sitting under another tree, drunk. The horse was beautiful and he came closer just to have a look. As he was standing near looking, a horse dealer passed by. The horse was a rare thing, really beautiful. He asked Nasruddin, “Is it your horse?”
Drunk, and feeling very good that such a beautiful horse could belong to him, he replied, “Yes.”
One thing led to another and the man said to him, “I would like to buy it. How much would you take for it?”
Now Nasruddin was caught. He simply asked an impossible price so there would be no problem. He answered, “Two thousand rupees.”
The horse was not worth more than five hundred rupees, so nobody was going to pay two thousand rupees; the matter would be settled. But as it happened the man said, “Okay, take these two thousand rupees.”
Now, he was in trouble, but two thousand rupees! He thought to himself, “The rabbi is inside and he doesn’t know. Why not take these two thousand rupees? There is no problem, nobody is looking.” So he said, “Okay.” He took the two thousand rupees and the dealer took the horse.
The moment the horse was gone the rabbi came out. Nasruddin was puzzled as what to do now. He had two thousand rupees and was so drunk he couldn’t even run away. He started working it out inside his head and found a solution. He leaned down on all fours as if he was a horse and put some hay in his mouth. The rabbi couldn’t believe what had happened. He said, “What are you doing? Are you mad?”
Nasruddin replied, “First, listen to my story.” His mind was working fast. He had become a theologian; he was working out one answer, then another question and he had stepped into his own trap. He said, “Twenty years ago, I was a young man and committed a sin with a woman. What did God do? He was so angry that he punished me and made me into a horse; your horse, rabbi. For twenty years I served you, but it seems now the punishment is over and I am again restored to being a man.”
The rabbi started trembling, seeing that a sinner had been punished. And who is not a sinner? The rabbi himself had sinned, with many women, so he started trembling seeing this phenomenon. He fell on his knees and started praying. There was a practical problem to be solved. He said, “It’s okay, but I have to go to the other town, so what to do now?”
Nasruddin made a suggestion, “The market is not very far; you can go and find a horse.”
So the rabbi went to the market. There was his own horse standing at the horse dealer’s! He started trembling again. He went near the horse’s ear, and said, “What, Nasruddin! So soon again?”

The mind goes on and on playing tricks: creating a God, praying, being punished, being sent to hell and heaven; the whole thing being just the imagination. There is no God, no hell, no heaven; only you are there and existence ? energy, infinite energy. If you are with it, it is with you. This is the state of a Buddha, a Heraclitus: totally with the total. There’s no problem. One is not there, really, to create problems. There is bliss. When you are not, there is bliss. Otherwise, you will be in trouble if you are fighting against it, moving away from it; doing things on your own, using your private intelligence, behaving like an island. Whatever explanations and rationalizations you create are futile, just imagination.
All your churches, temples and mosques stand on man’s fertile imagination. All your gods, statues, your prayers are creations of your imagination. You have created them because you are miserable. This won’t help. Your temples, mosques, churches – no! Your popes, priests, rabbis – no! They can’t help. They are exploiting your imagination. It is a good business. You have to drop imagining. You have to feel that misery comes when you are out of step with nature and happiness comes when you are not out of step.
Hell is being out of step with the logos. Heaven is being in step with the logos. That is the hidden harmony. If you can find it, you become blissful. If you cannot find it, you are miserable. Nobody else is responsible.
You have to seek and find. There is no God, but everybody is divine. The whole of existence is divine, godly, but there is no God. So don’t waste your time and don’t look upward for someone to help you. Help will come, but there is no one to give it to you; you have to take it. But this seems to be arduous, difficult because you have to change yourself. To be in step with nature you will need a radical transformation. To avoid that radical transformation, you create every type of explanation.
Now try to enter these beautiful lines.
This universe,
which is the same for all,
has not been made by any god or man,
but it has always been, is, and will be –
an ever-living fire,
kindling itself by regular measures
and going out by regular measures.
Evolution and involution; things coming to a peak and disappearing in a valley; waves rising to touch the sky and moving back to the depth of the ocean in regular measures.
Heraclitus says, “The world is energy, existence is fire. In regular measures it manifests and unmanifests itself.” Just like day and night; during the day, awake you work and in the night you rest. So there are periods when existence is in the day and there are periods when existence moves into the night; creation and uncreation, evolution and involution, day and night, summer and winter, life and death.
This is a creation period. Soon there will be a decreation period. Hindus call that pralaya, when everything disappears. Hindus have a beautiful theory for it. Heraclitus would have nodded assent. Hindus say that the Brahma, the creator, has his own day; a twenty-four hour day, a twenty-four hour circle; a twelve-hour day and a twelve-hour night. His twelve-hour day is our creation; millions and millions of years, eons and eons of time. Then comes the night of Brahma, where everything disappears, sleeps, rests – tired, of course. To rejuvenate itself, to come back, it goes into nonexistence. Existence is the day, nonexistence is the night. In a regular measure, for the same time, existence disappears, energy rests. When it has rested, the day comes again; the sun rises and things appear again, everything starts again. It is a circle. Half the circle is of manifestation and half is unmanifestation.
Just like a tree grows and grows and grows and dies, but it does not die completely. It collects itself into seeds, becomes unmanifest, moves into the subtle. Seeds fall down onto the ground, the tree disappears, but in the right season the seeds will sprout again and the whole tree will come again. It happens, not because there is some controller, a God or a man or somebody; there is nobody. Energy itself is enough. It needs no control, it needs no one there. Energy has its own intrinsic discipline. This seems to be exactly right because if you watch you will feel this is how it happens. You feel hungry, you eat and hunger disappears. Where’s the hunger gone? ? it has become unmanifest, moved to the seeds, to the subtle. It is not on the periphery; it has gone to the center again. After a few hours you feel hungry again, the hunger has returned. You eat, hunger disappears. Where does it go? If it disappears completely, it cannot come back. It comes again and again and again, in the same measure.
During the day you are awake. Where has the sleep gone? ? it has moved to the seeds, become subtle; it is there inside you watching for the right time to become manifest. By the night it becomes manifest again, so where does your day disappear? While asleep, have you ever noticed where the whole world of the day has gone? The market, the politics, the identity, everything disappears; you have gone to the seeds. In the morning the sun rises and you rise again. From where do you come? ? from the unmanifest to the manifest again. It is a centrifugal and centripetal movement. The lotus closes and opens, in a regular measure.
This is an energy phenomenon; no personality in it, it is impersonal. It is beautiful impersonal; if it is personal it will become ugly. All religions have become ugly because they make it personal, they create a person in it. That person is just an imaginary phenomenon you have created. That’s why thousands of gods exist and everybody has his own notion about God. When you have a notion about God, others’ notions look wrong; there is conflict, argument. Your notion of God cannot be right because you are not right. A person who is right needs no God.
Look at Buddha, Heraclitus, they don’t need any God. H. G. Wells has written about Buddha stating, “He is the most godless and yet the most godly man.” Can you find a man more godly or more godless than Buddha? He never talks about God because he doesn’t project. He has no fear inside to create a projection; he is fearless. God disappears; your fear is the cause. When God disappears, this whole existence is for you to enjoy and celebrate. Energy is delight. Blake has said that energy is delight.
When there is no God, you are free, totally free. With a God up there manipulating, you can never be free; you can only be puppets with all the strings in his hand. All religious people become puppets because someone else is responsible for everything.
A really religious person is totally free.
Religiousness is freedom. With God, there can be no freedom. How can there be freedom if there is a creator? And he seems a little crazy. Any moment he can change his mind and say, “Okay, disappear!” Just as it is said in the Bible, “Let there be light” and light was born. Any moment he can say, “Let there be no light.” Then what happens? Does light disappear? You must simply be puppets. It seems that he is playing chess and you are on the chessboard, so whatever he wants to make of you he can. The whole thing looks ugly.
If there is no freedom, there cannot be any consciousness because consciousness grows with more freedom. Total freedom is possible only if there is no person controlling, manipulating; no boss in existence. Only then is there freedom. But freedom makes you afraid. You don’t want to be free. You want to be slaves; that’s why you create God. If there is no God ? the communists for example, tried a religion without a God. But man is so afraid, he cannot live without gods; so communism has created its own gods. Lenin has become a god; now they worship him. Now Lenin is no ordinary mortal; he is a god. You cannot escape because you are afraid.
Only a man who is totally unafraid, fearless ? one who has come to terms with existence, one who has understood that to be with existence and to flow with it is to be blissful ? can live without God. Only this man can live without any person being projected on existence, can live without imagination – can live with truth. It is hard to live with truth. It is very easy to live with lies. That’s why you create lies around you. Ninety-nine percent of the things around you are lies. But you feel cozy, comfortable with them; they are comfortable lies. Truth is uncomfortable because it requires a radical change. This is the most radical change that can happen to a man – that he lives without God. If you can live without God, you become a god, you become godly. If you go on imagining a God, you remain a slave. With a boss overhead you will be a slave. When the boss is no longer there, you yourself have become a god.
I say to you, “There is no God.” Everybody is God, everything is godly. There is no person controlling because the whole existence would be ugly, a slavery, a great concentration camp; it would be a prison. No God, life is freedom. You can choose! If you want to be miserable, be miserable; that’s your choice. If you want to be happy, be happy; that’s your choice. If you feel happy being miserable, it’s okay. There are people who feel very, very happy being miserable because through their misery they attract compassion. Through their misery they ask for sympathy; through their misery, they are begging for love.
But who can love a miserable person? Unless one is a buddha, it is impossible to love any miserable person. You are on a suicidal path. If you are asking for love through being miserable, you can get a little sympathy, but not love. That little sympathy will be given to you very grudgingly because who is ready to give love to a miserable person? He himself is in need, he himself is miserable. That’s why people talk so much about their miseries. Listen to their conversation, ninety-nine percent is about their miseries; they magnify their miseries, make them look as great as possible. It’s not possible because you are so tiny you cannot carry such big miseries; you are asking for sympathy.
Man is afraid of freedom. There is a deep-rooted fear of freedom because with freedom comes insecurity; with freedom comes the unknown, with freedom you don’t know beforehand what is going to happen. With a God and a destiny everything is certain. You can ask an astrologer or a palmist and they can tell you about your future. With no God, there is no destiny. The astrologers are useless. Nothing can be said about the future. The future remains an open situation – nothing fixed, everything flexible and fluid. With freedom you become a fluidity. With God bossing you, you are secure; somebody is looking after you and he knows better what to do and what not to do.
In this sense, Heraclitus’s insight is deeper than Jesus. In this sense, Heraclitus comes through better than Jesus or Mohammed; his insight is exactly as deep as Zarathustra, Buddha, Mahavira because Jesus goes on talking in terms of God, creation, father, son. Maybe he has to talk in those terms because of the juvenile attitude of the Jews and the people around him. Heraclitus doesn’t bother about you; he says exactly what is true. He doesn’t bother whether you understand or not; he simply states the truth. If you want to understand, you have to grow. He will not come down to you, you will have to go to him.
This is exactly my attitude. I say exactly what I feel. If you want to understand me you have to grow toward me. I’m not going to come down and talk to you on your terms because that never helps. Jesus did that and missed the whole thing and Christianity was born, which is nothing but a new edition of the Jewish religion, nothing new. Jews modified a little here and there, nothing new because Jesus used the whole Jewish terminology. How can you create a new world out of the old? He compromised; Jesus never thought that there was going to be a new religion. He remained a Jew, died a Jew; he was never a Christian. He never imagined that there was going to be something new; he lived in the fold. He used past, rotten words; hence the ugly face of Christianity.
Heraclitus is absolutely fresh. That’s why the Greek mind couldn’t understand him at all; he has no roots in the past.
When I am dead, where will you put me? You will not find any roots for me in India. I was born a Jaina, but you will not find any roots in Jainism for me; simply, you cannot find any roots. If you say exactly what you have understood, what you have realized, there are no roots because truth has no roots in society; it has roots in existence, but not in society. That’s why a man like Heraclitus becomes puzzling and even a genius like Aristotle says, “Heraclitus is absurd. He creates puzzles and philosophy is to solve something, not to create puzzles.”
He is not creating any puzzle. He looks puzzling because he is stating a fresh phenomenon that he has encountered. He is not using old, used, secondhand terms for it. He says: This universe, which is the same for all, has not been made by any god or man, but it has always been, is, and will be – an ever-living fire, kindling itself by regular measures and going out by regular measures.
This energy has its own intrinsic system. It is a cosmos not a chaos, and without a boss. Energy plus freedom and yet there is a discipline. That discipline is the inner harmony, the hidden harmony. No boss and yet there is no chaos; no one managing and yet everything is managed so beautifully; you cannot improve upon it. This is the hidden harmony. If there is a manager, you can be certain that the things he manages will go wrong here and there. It is such a beautiful cosmos because there is no manager in it.
This will be difficult to understand. Religious people say, “How can this world become a cosmos if there is nobody in control? Without a controller everything will fall apart!” Heraclitus says, “Exactly, precisely because there is no controller, things cannot fall apart.” When you control, you mismanage. You cannot find greater mismanagers than managers; they mismanage. That’s what Lao Tzu says. He says, “When there were no rulers everything was beautiful; when there was no law there was no crime and when there were no wise men there were no fools.” Things moved in their cosmic beauty. The rulers entered and said that rules are needed. With rules, misrule entered because the opposite is always there. Wise men came and said that man must be disciplined; man became rebellious and everything went wrong. More and more laws were introduced and man became more and more criminal.
This is what Heraclitus says: “Precisely, if there is no one in control, how can things go out of control?” Energy itself has an intrinsic, inner guide. Listen to this concerning your life also. If you are guided by your insight, if you listen to your heart, there will be no need for any discipline. You move completely in trust and everything will be good. But because you cannot listen to your own heart you have to listen to the many manipulators who go on manipulating. They say, “Do this!” and “Don’t do this!” You are confused, you don’t know what to do. One religion teaches one thing, another one something else. One morality says that this is moral, another morality says that this is immoral. You are simply confused and cannot find your own heart from where the intrinsic, the natural, the spontaneous guide comes. The more you have been taught, the more confused you have become.
Heraclitus says, “Everything moves by an inner harmony.” Who is controlling these trees? Who teaches them that now it’s the right time to produce their flowers? Who says to the clouds that the time is coming near and you have to shower and bring the rain? ? nobody. Remember, if there is someone, things will go wrong because how can such a vast thing be managed? Even if there were a God, he would probably have cracked up by now! Just think of the immensity, the tremendousness, the vastness of things. Yes, God would have already cracked up long ago, gone mad and simply disappeared from the world, or the world would have fallen apart. It can remain a cosmos only because the harmony is not being forced from above; it grows from within.
There are two types of discipline. One that is forced from without where someone says “Do this!” The other that comes from within. You feel what will be natural; you feel where your being is flowing and move with your feeling and an inner discipline enters. Outer discipline is a deception and creates confusion and a rift in you. The inner and outer are opposed, they become antagonistic.

Just a few days ago, a man came to me and said – as all religious people will agree: “Again and again I’m a victim of outer things, again and again I forget the inner.”
I asked him, “What do you mean? Please give me a concrete example.”
He replied, “Well for example, my inner knows that I should remain faithful to my wife, but I fall in love with other women again and again.”
So I had to tell him, “You seem to be confused. You don’t know which is the inner and which is the outer. Your wife is the outer and you think that is the inner. Do you love your wife?”
He said, “Of course not. If I was in love with her, why would I fall for other women?”

The wife is the outer; forced by society, by your own ego, by pretensions you would like to keep an image of in society ? that you are a good husband. This is the outer and he is saying that this is the inner. When you fall in love with another woman – whom nobody is forcing you to do, on the contrary, everybody is preventing you – that is inner! But society has confused you completely, it has made you disoriented. It says that the outer is the inner; it has deceived you completely. It says that the inner is the outer.
You go on a fast and you think that this is the inner voice; this is your religion, your scriptures, your priests. Your inner says, “You are hungry, eat!” You think that this is the outer, the Devil tempting you. What foolishness! The priest has tempted you to fast. The Devil is not there! The priests are the only devilish forces in the world. Hunger comes, this is the inner. The whole body, every cell of it says, “Eat!” You say, “This is the outer. Someone, some evil force is tempting me” or “This is desire, this is the body and the body is the enemy; my soul is on a fast.”
Your soul, on a fast? The soul never needs any food, so how can it go on a fast? You are forcing your poor body. There is also a natural fast; it happens in animals. There’s no preacher, no priest teaching them, but it happens. If you watch a dog, if he is not feeling well he won’t eat – this is the inner. A dog’s fast is inner. What absurdity! A man’s fast is almost always outer. Only a dog can fast inwardly because he is still in contact with nature, you are not.
No animal can be forced to eat when its body is ill. If you force him to eat he will vomit. This is beautiful. The body doesn’t need it; it is ill. The whole energy is needed for the body to cure itself; that energy will be diverted if you eat because the energy will be needed to digest food. It will be a burden. When the body is not in good condition, the whole energy is needed for the body to cure itself and if food is forced into it, that will be a division. Now the whole of the energy will move toward curing, but it will be prevented because first the food has to be digested.
If during your illness you simply listen inward and don’t eat, that’s beautiful. Sometimes you don’t feel hungry, so don’t eat. But don’t take a vow that you will fast for a few days because who knows? In the evening you may feel hungry. Move with nature. When nature wants you to fast, fast. When nature wants you to eat, eat.
The inner has to be found because society has completely confused you. There is a vast confusion about what is inner and what is outer. Almost always, whatever you think is the outer is likely to be the inner and whatever you think is the inner is bound to be the outer because priests have done that. They are the destructive forces.
To me, there is only one religion and that is to find the inner voice, the inner guide. The person who helps you to find your inner guide is the master. He helps you not to give yourself an outer discipline, he simply helps you to find the inner harmony which gives discipline. That discipline has a grace because it is not forced; that discipline has a beauty of its own because it is always fresh. You cannot go astray because you cannot revolt with that discipline. It is you, your very innermost core. The same thing is happening on a vaster scale in the whole cosmos.
The phases of fire are craving and satiety.
The fire has two phases. First craving, when you are hungry. Hindus call it jatharagni, the fire of hunger. If you are really hungry your stomach feels really fiery. Because you are in such a bad shape, you don’t know when you’re hungry and when you’re not. Every day, you eat at one o’clock and you feel hungry at one o’clock every day. That hunger is psychological; you won’t feel any fire in the stomach because that is just according to the clock. The clock says that it’s one o’clock and the mind says that now the time has come to be hungry. Immediately you feel hungry; this is a projection. This is a false hunger. If you wait for half an hour, it will disappear automatically. How can real hunger disappear so easily? The real hunger will grow more and more. The fire will become more and more of a fire in the stomach. You will start feeling pain there, a burning sensation all over the body. You will feel feverish. The body needs satiety, the body is demanding; energy is needed. But if it is a false hunger, it will disappear. When the clock has moved to two o’clock, the hunger disappears.
Watch! When you feel really hungry, eat. Watch! When you feel really sleepy, sleep. It will take a few months to settle because the whole of civilization, culture, society, education, have all helped to push you from the right path. The right path is always natural – the logos. The phases of fire are craving and satiety. These are the two phases of fire, the inner biofire, the bioenergy. You feel hungry, you eat and you feel satisfied. That satisfaction is also a phase of fire. The fire has subsided, now there are no flames; it has disappeared. It is a pralaya, a de-creation, an involution. The other phase comes again. The circle moves, the wheel moves; the hunger phase comes again and again satiety. You feel sexual, lust, then satiety. You feel love and satiety.
You cannot love for the whole twenty-four hours because the fire has two phases. Husbands and wives try to do the impossible. They want to love each other twenty-four hours of the day and everything goes astray. You cannot because you cannot eat twenty-four hours of the day. Love is food. Can you eat for twenty-four hours? You have to give gaps so that the food is absorbed and with the energy used, the body becomes hungry again. How can you love for twenty-four hours? If you try the impossible, you will be in bad shape. The more you force it, the more everything will become false.
That’s why husbands and wives lose the whole beauty of love. Everything becomes false and forced. When they were lovers everything was beautiful because sometimes they would meet and there would be a hunger and it would need satiety. Sometimes they would have to wait for the day to pass, the lover would be coming and there would be a hunger. When there is deep hunger, love is deeply satisfied. When husbands and wives cling to each other for twenty-four hours, hang around each other like shadows, there is no hunger. Of course, there is no satiety. The whole beauty disappears. Remember, if you love a person, let the person be alone so that the hunger arises. One has to, otherwise the love will be according to the clock.

One day Mulla Nasruddin came home and found his greatest friend kissing his wife. He said, “What! I cannot believe my eyes. I have to, but why you?”

A husband cannot believe it because love becomes a duty. When love becomes a duty it is already dead; it is an outer enforcement, the inner thing is lost. Love is a hunger, not a duty. It has a satiety phase. When love is satisfied you feel absolutely blissful; everything is okay and you can bless the whole existence and be blessed by it. Everything is simply wonderful, but it has to be through hunger.
Heraclitus is saying that man is a miniature of the whole cosmos. The same is true of the whole. The whole passes through two phases. When the whole is in hunger, there is much activity and creation. Things grow, manifestation comes in, trees flower, people love, children are born; everything is a dynamic activity. Satisfied, existence moves into a satiety phase and everything disappears. No trees, earth, stars, sun; the fire is resting.
The sun is new each day.
And this is one of the most penetrating maxims of Heraclitus. The sun is new each day. Hunger is new each day. Love is new each day. Life is new each day. To say “each day” is not good. Each movement, gesture, moment, everything is new. So where does the old come from? Why do you get bored? If everything is so new and you cannot step in the same river twice and cannot see the same sunrise again; if everything is so new and fresh, why do you become dead and bored? – because you don’t live out of the inner harmony. You live out of the mind. The mind is old.
Each sun, each morning, each hunger, each satiety is new; the mind is old. The mind is the past, the mind is the accumulated memory. If you look through the mind, it gives a deadness and oldness to everything; everything looks dusty, dirty. It is because of the mind. Put aside the mind, put aside memories. If you can put aside memories, your wife is new every day because it is only because of memories that you think that you have lived with this woman thirty years and you know her well. Who knows? Nobody ever knows. We remain strangers, strangers eternally. How can you know a person? A thing can be known, not a person, because a thing can be exhausted. Now scientists say that even things cannot be known because they cannot be exhausted either.
How can you know a person? A person is freedom. Each moment he changes. If you cannot step twice in a river, how can you encounter the same person again? If rivers are changing, the consciousness, the stream of consciousness, cannot be old. If you put aside the mind, if you don’t look with old eyes, your wife becomes new, every gesture is new. There is a continuous excitement in your life, a continuous aliveness. This day you will feel hungry; that hunger is new. This day, when you eat again the food is new because nothing can be old in existence. Existence has no past. The past is part of the mind.
Existence is always in the present, new, fresh, always moving, a dynamic force, a dialectical movement; it flows like a river. If this insight happens to you, you will never be bored. Boredom is the greatest disease; it kills deeply, it is a slow poisoning. By and by, you are so bored that you become a dead weight on yourself. The whole poetry of life disappears where no flowers flower and no birds sing. You are already entombed, you have entered your grave. It is said that people die nearabout thirty and are buried nearabout seventy. Even thirty seems too long; this proverb must be from the ancient days. Now that’s not true; it’s nearabout twenty. Even that seems to be too late. Young people come to me, still young, just eighteen or twenty and say, “We feel bored.” They have become old already. You have taught them, you have already conditioned their minds. They are already dying. Before even being young they are dying.
Remember, youth is a quality of being.
If you can look at the world without the mind you will remain young forever and ever. Even in your death you will be young, excited that death is approaching. A great, exciting, adventure; a culmination. Now a door opens to the infinity. Hunger has passed, now comes satiety. Now you are moving into rest. You will be a seed and the seed will rest and sleep for many, many years. You will sprout again, open your eyes again; it is never the same.
Nothing is ever the same. Everything goes on changing. Only the mind is old and dead. To be capable of looking at life without the mind is meditation.
Enough for today.

============================================================

It would not be better
if things happened to men
just as they wish.

Unless you expect the unexpected
you will never find the truth,
for it is hard to discover
and hard to attain.

Nature loves to hide.

The Lord whose oracle is at Delphi
neither speaks nor conceals –
but gives signs.
Existence has no language and if you depend on language there can be no communication with it. It is a mystery, you cannot interpret it. If you interpret, you miss. Existence can be lived, but not thought about. It is more like poetry, less like philosophy. It is a sign, it is a door. It shows, but says nothing. That’s why you cannot approach existence through the mind. If you think about it ? and you can go on thinking and thinking about it ? you will never reach it because it’s precisely thinking that’s the barrier.
If you look, see, feel, touch you will be nearer. But don’t think. The moment thinking enters, you are thrown off the track; you live in a private world. Thinking is a private world; it belongs to you. You are enclosed, encapsulated, imprisoned within yourself. With nonthinking, you are no more, you are no longer enclosed; with nonthinking, you open, you become porous. Existence flows in you and you flow in existence.
The tendency of the mind is to interpret; before you see something you have already interpreted it. You hear me; even before I have said anything you are already thinking about it. That’s how listening becomes impossible. You will have to learn to listen. Listening means you are open, vulnerable, receptive, but you are not in any way thinking. Thinking is a positive action. Listening is passivity; you become like a valley and receive, you become like a womb and receive. If you can listen, nature speaks, but it is not a language. Nature doesn’t use words. What does nature use? Heraclitus says it uses signs. A flower is there, what is the sign? It isn’t saying anything, but can you really say it’s not saying anything? It is saying much, but it is not using any words – a wordless message.
To hear the wordless you will have to become wordless because only the same can hear the same, only the same can relate to the same. Sitting next to a flower, don’t be a man, be a flower. Sitting next to a tree, don’t be a man, be a tree. Bathing in a river, don’t be a man, be a river. Millions of signs are given to you. It is not a communication, it is a communion. Nature speaks in thousands of tongues, but not in language. It speaks through millions of directions, but you cannot consult a dictionary about it and you cannot ask a philosopher what it means. The moment you start thinking about what it means you are already on the path of going astray.
A very learned man, a critic, came to visit Picasso. He looked at Picasso’s paintings and said, “They look beautiful, but what do they mean?” There was a painting just in front of where they were standing and the critic said, “For example this painting. What does it mean?” Picasso shrugged his shoulders and replied, “Look outside the window. What does this tree mean? What’s the meaning of this bird who is singing? What is the meaning of the sun rising? If this whole exists without any meaning, why can’t my painting?”
Why do you ask what it means? ? you want to interpret it. You want to give it a linguistic pattern. You want to communicate, not commune. No, it doesn’t mean anything. It is there in its total glory. It has a meaning, but it doesn’t mean anything. The meaning is existential. Look, watch, feel, move into it; allow it to move into you, but don’t ask questions. If you want to ask questions, go to a university; you cannot enter the universe. If you want to enter the universe, don’t ask because there is no one to reply to you. You will have a totally different quality of being; only then will you be in contact with it.

It is reported that a Zen master was doing a painting in the king’s palace – a very rare phenomenon, unbelievable; the mind boggles. Again and again the king asked, “Is it complete yet?”
The Zen master would reply, “Wait a little longer, wait a little longer.”
Years passed and the king said, “It’s taking too long. Won’t you even allow me to enter the room” ? the Zen master would always lock the room and then paint – “I am getting old and becoming more and more excited about what you’re doing inside the room. Isn’t the painting ready yet?”
The master replied, “The painting is ready, but I am watching and waiting for you; you are not ready. The painting was ready long ago, but that is not the point. Unless you are ready, to whom will I show it?”
Existence is always there at every moment, waiting, ready. It is forever waiting at every turn of the road, just at the corner. It is an infinite patience, waiting, but you are not ready.
It is said that the king was ready and the painter said, “Okay, the time has come.”
They entered the room; no one else was allowed inside. The painting was really wonderful. It was difficult to say that it was a painting; it looked real. The master’s painting was of hills and valleys. They looked almost three-dimensional, as if they existed. Next to the hills was a small path leading somewhere inside. Now comes the most difficult part of the story. The king asked, “Where does this road lead?”
The master replied, “I haven’t traveled on this road yet, but wait, I will go and take a look.” He started walking on the path, disappeared beyond the hills and never came back.

This is what a mystery means ? it says many things without saying anything. If you move into nature to find where it leads, don’t stand outside it and ask because then nothing can be done; you have to move into it. If you move you will never come back because with the very movement into existence you are losing your ego, you are disappearing. You will reach the goal, but you will never come back to relate the story. The Zen master never came back. Nobody comes back. Nobody can come back because the more existential you become, the more you are lost.
Existence opens millions of doors for you, but you stand outside wanting to know something about it from the outside. There is no outside in nature. I would like to repeat these words: there is no outside in nature, everything is inside.
How can anything exist outside nature? The whole is the inner. The mind is trying the impossible; it is trying to stand outside, to watch, to see what it means. No, you have to participate. You have to move in it, become one and disperse like a cloud – whereabouts unknown.
Now listen to these words of Heraclitus:
It would not be better
if things happened to men
just as they wish.
Why? Why wouldn’t it be better? – because whatever you wish will be wrong because you are wrong! How can you wish, or desire, something to be right? To desire something right, you have to be right in the first place. Out of ignorance, whatever is desired will lead you to a deeper and deeper hell because a desire is part of you, it comes out of you. How can anything else come? All that comes will be you. That’s why, more and more, your desires create problems. The more you desire, the more problems you create. The more you achieve your desires, the more you are in difficulty. There is no going back, you have to go on and on and on. Hence the insistence of all the knowers that to meet existence, the first point is to become desireless.
Nothing is wrong in desiring; desiring in itself is beautiful – if a Buddha desires. But you desiring: how can you desire something which will lead you toward bliss? No, because desire comes out of you, it is part of you, it is a continuity. If you are wrong, the desire is going to be wrong. You will repeat it again and again; of course, in different situations, in different worlds, on different planets, in different lives, but your desires will repeat. Your desires cannot transform you. That’s why I say to people, “If you want to take sannyas, if you want to take a jump into the unknown, don’t think about it. Leave it to me!” Why the emphasis on leaving it to me? ? just so you don’t desire it. Let it be something which has not come from you because whatever comes out of you, will be you; modified, colored in different ways, but it will be you.
If you are a businessman and desire moksha, it will be a business; it cannot be otherwise. Of course, you will be looking for profit in the other world, but whatever comes out of your mind will be out of your past. A break is needed, a complete rift is needed; a rift which is unbridgeable. That is the meaning of going to a master and surrendering. What do you surrender? ? you surrender your desiring. What else can you surrender? You haven’t got anything else.
You say, “Now I won’t desire. Now you say something to me and I will do it.” You are allowing something else to enter your past. If you say, “Yes, I’m convinced. I’m ready to take sannyas,” the sannyas will be futile. If sannyas happens out of your conviction, it is meaningless. But this is the trouble. You would like to be convinced first; you would like to argue about it first. Your mind would like to have it settled.
People come to me and say, “How can we take the jump, unless the desire comes?” This is precisely the problem. You have been continuously desiring for many lives. It leads nowhere, it cannot. Can you see the point? You are wrong, you desire; the desire goes wrong. You are wrong, you believe; the belief goes wrong. Have you heard about King Midas? Whatever he touched became gold. Whatever you touch, even if it is gold, is immediately turned into dust. The question is not of a right or wrong desire, the question is of a right being or a wrong being. The question is not of a right act or a wrong act. There are no right or wrong acts, there are no right or wrong desires. There is only a desiring being. If it is ignorant, whatever comes out of it is going to be wrong. If the desiring being is not ignorant, something totally different is born out of him.
Remember, being matters and only being matters – nothing else. It would not be better if things happened to men just as they wish. Stop wishing! You have been living in hell because you have been wishing. Stop desiring! Stop desiring and the doors are open. Desiring brings your mind into existence. Try to understand the nature of desire. Desiring means projecting your past into the future and the future is unknown; whatever you ask will be from the past. All desiring will just repeat the past again and again. How can you desire the unknown? How can you desire anything in the future? You don’t know it; the future is the unknown, the past is the known. If you desire, it will be from the past.

Mulla Nasruddin was on his deathbed. Someone asked him, “If you were born again, would you like to make any changes or would you like to live the same life again?”
Mulla brooded for a long while, opened his eyes and replied, “One change. I’ve always wanted to part my hair in the middle; that’s the only change. I’ve always parted my hair on the right and I always wanted to part it in the middle. Otherwise, everything would be repeated as it is.”

It looks stupid, but this is how it is. If you think about it and another chance is given to you, what will you do? All the changes that you will want to make will not be more than what Mulla is asking; they will be just the parting of the hair in the middle. You would like to have another woman, but what difference would it make? You would like another profession, but what difference would it make? It will not be more than parting the hair in the middle.
You can’t ask from the past and the future is unknown. You go on asking from the past and move in a vicious circle. That circle is the world, the samsara; the coming and going, being born and dying again. You do the same again and again. Not a single basic change! There cannot be because whatever you think, you do out of the known. The known is your past. What to do? ? don’t desire. Let the future come without you desiring it. The future will come, it need not be desired. It is already coming. You need not force your projections on it. Be passive, don’t be active about it. Let it come. Don’t ask anything about it; that’s the meaning of desirelessness. It is not moving from the world, not renouncing it and going to the Himalayas; all those things are immature.
Leaving, renouncing, means not desiring; waiting without any desire. Just waiting, “Whatever happens we will be a witness to it.” If you can wait without desiring, everything will happen to you. It happens from the totality, from the whole, from God itself. If you ask, desire, it will happen, but it will happen out of you. You move within yourself, enclosed, never allowing existence to happen to you. It would not be better if things happened to men just as they wish.
Heraclitus says, “It is good that things don’t happen as you wish them.” That is the only possibility of your awakening. That’s why he says, “It is good.” If every desire is fulfilled, you will be completely in a coma because there will be no disturbance. You wanted riches and they are there. You wanted beautiful women and they are there. You wanted success and success is there. You wanted a ladder to reach to heaven and the ladder is there. You will be in a coma, you will be in a dream. If everything is fulfilled, you will never try to seek the truth, there will be no gap for you; only misery, dukkha, unhappiness. The hell that you create around you helps you to awaken. It shocks you toward waking.
In Hindu mythology they say that in heaven, where the gods exist, every wish is fulfilled immediately, with no time gap. In the Hindu conception of heaven, there are wish-fulfilling trees, kalpatarus. You just sit under them and wish anything and without any time gap your wish is there. Not a single moment is lost. You ask for a beautiful woman and there she is. But these gods must be living in a dream, they must be living in a drugged, stoned state.
Hindus say that from heaven there is no way toward truth. This is very beautiful. They say that if a god wishes to be liberated completely, he will have to come to earth. Why? – because in heaven there is no unhappiness, there is no misery to wake anyone up. It is a long peaceful sleep where dreams are continuously fulfilled. When every dream is fulfilled, why should you open your eyes? Even gods have to come to earth; only then can they be liberated. This is a rare conception. Christians don’t have that type of conception; their heaven is the last thing. But Hindus say that it is not the last thing. It is just a beautiful, good, very long, dream state; it can last for thousands of years, but it is a dream state. If the gods are to be liberated they have to fall back to earth. Why to earth? – because on earth there is misery, pain, anguish; only anguish is needed, only that can shock you out of your slumber.
Heraclitus is right: It would not be better if things happened to men just as they wish. Something or other always goes wrong. That’s beautiful! If nothing goes wrong, if everything is as it is, is as you would like it to be, then who wants truth? Who seeks existence? Who wants freedom, total freedom, moksha? ? nobody!
Through using drugs, man is trying to be like the gods in the Hindu heaven. You take marijuana, hashish, or LSD and you are in a dream state, a beautiful dream state; you are under a wish-fulfilling tree. Drugs are against truth because truth needs an awakening. An awakening from the past, an awakening from the dreams, an awakening from your desires. To see the whole fallacy that you have created around you and to drop it. To drop it without any effort; just to see that it is wrong and to drop it.
Remember, if you make so much effort to drop it, the very effort makes you ugly. Really, understanding needs no effort. You understand a thing, you see the reality and drop it. Can’t you see that you are miserable because of your desires? Is it something to be argued, something to be convinced of? Can’t you see? It is so clear that you have created a hell out of desires; then why make an effort? In a sheer, intense moment of understanding, why not drop it immediately? If you can drop it immediately, you will have a beauty, a grace.
This grace you will not find in so-called monks. All over the world, you will not find this grace in Catholic, Hindu, Jaina monks because they are trying to drop it. The very effort to drop it shows that they are still clinging; otherwise, why make any effort? They would like to stop desiring, but this is again a desiring. That’s why there is effort. They cling and they would like to drop it. They haven’t come to a moment of understanding, a moment of truth.
My whole effort with you is to bring you to a moment of understanding where effort is useless. The understanding is so intense, so fiery, that everything simply burns. You see and your very seeing becomes the dropping.
This is possible; it has happened to me, it can happen to you. I am in no way exceptional, just an ordinary man. If it happens to an ordinary man like me, why not to you? Just make an intense search toward understanding. Understanding is transformation, mutation, a revelation. Understanding liberates.
Listen to these words:
It would not be better
if things happened to men
just as they wish.

Unless you expect the unexpected
you will never find the truth,
for it is hard to discover
and hard to attain.
Let these words enter your heart: Unless you expect the unexpected, you will never find the truth… Truth cannot be your expectation. Whatever you expect will be a lie. Whatever you expect will be a projection. Whatever you expect will be a part of your mind. No, truth cannot be expected. It takes you unawares. In fact, it comes when you were not even waiting for it. It is a sudden enlightenment.
Expectation means your known projecting itself into the future, into the unknown. That’s why I say that if you are a Christian, Hindu, Buddhist, or a Jaina, you will miss because what does it mean to be a Christian? ? it means a Christian expectation. It means a god seen through Christian eyes. It means a conception, a philosophy. What does it mean to be a Hindu? ? it means a system of belief. It gives an expectation. You expect a god, you expect the truth. The truth will be like this, the god will be like this; the face, the figure, the form, the name you expect.
Your expectation is the barrier because God is the unexpected, the truth is the unexpected. It has never been theorized about, it has never been brought into language; it cannot be forced into words. Nobody has ever been able to and nobody ever will. It remains the unexpected. It is a stranger. Whenever God knocks at your door, you will not find a familiar face, no. It is the unfamiliar, the stranger. You never thought about it, you never heard about it, you never read about it. Just the stranger. If you cannot accept the stranger and ask for the familiar ? truth is not for you.
Truth is a stranger.
It comes without giving any intimation that it is coming. It comes when you are not expecting, not waiting for it. Remember this, people meditate and meditate and meditate – that’s a must – but truth never happens in meditation. It happens outside. But meditation helps; it makes you alert, it makes you watchful, it makes you more aware and conscious. Suddenly somewhere, it happens in such unexpected moments, you cannot believe why God chooses such unexpected moments.
A nun is carrying water; the bamboo breaks, the earthen pot falls on the ground and the water runs out ? suddenly she is awakened. What happened? For forty, fifty years she was meditating and it never knocked. Meditation means you are expecting, you are watching out for something that is going to happen. Your mind is there, very, very, very subtly working; you may not even be able to detect where it is. You may think that now everything is silent, no thoughts, but this is also a thought. You feel absolute silence, but even this feeling that now there is absolute silence, now soon the door is going to open; this is a thought. When you become absolutely silent, even the thought that I am silent is not there. If it is there, that means you mustn’t be meditating. This is the paradox: meditate as much as you can to bring a moment of a non-meditative meditation.
That happened to that nun. Carrying water, she was not worried about God; the bamboo was old and she was worried about the bamboo. She was holding it this way and that way, worried that it may break any moment. It was an earthen pot and it would break! She wasn’t at all at the door and the door was open because she had meditated for forty years. So the door was open and she was not there at all. Suddenly the bamboo breaks, the pot falls, breaks and the water runs out. It is a shock! For a moment even this worry dissolves. Now whatever was going to happen has happened. Now she is in a non-meditative moment – God is there. It happened.
It has always happened that way; in such moments one never expects it. When you expect, you miss because you are there in your expectation. When you don’t expect it, it happens because you are not there, nobody is there. When your house is totally empty, so empty that you are not even aware that, “I am empty.” That will be enough of a disturbance and when even emptiness is thrown out, he comes.
Unless you expect the unexpected… Drop all your notions about God. All notions are false. You may have heard Hindus say that Christian notions are false and Christians say that Hindu notions are false. Jainas say that Christians and Hindus are false, Buddhists say Jainas, Hindus, Christians are false. I say that all notions are false. Not that my notion is right – no! Notion as such is false because it makes a theory out of the unknown, which is not possible. Without any exception, all theories are false. They are absolutely, categorically false – mine included ? because the unexpected remains the unexpected.
Unless you expect the unexpected you will never find the truth, for it is hard to discover and hard to attain. In fact, it is not hard to attain and not hard to discover. It is because of you that it is hard because how to put this mind aside? The mind is subtle; even when you put it aside it remains. The mind says, “Okay, I will not be here,” but this is also the mind. The mind says, “Now, let God knock at the door. I am not,” but this is also the mind. The mind says, “I will meditate; I will drop all thoughts.” And then says, “Look! I have dropped all thoughts. Look! I am empty.” This is also the mind and this is the problem; whatever you do the mind stands there.
See the point; no effort will help. Just see the point that the mind exists through claims. See the point! Why do I say, “See the point?” – because if you see the point there is no claim. If you don’t see the point, the mind can claim, “I am here without any claim.” See the point! Emptiness is needed, not the claim, “I am empty.” Awareness is needed, not the claim, “I am awareness.” Wherever the “I” comes in, you have entered the dark night of the mind. When the “I” is not there, it is light, everything is clear; a clarity, a perception, infinite. You can see far and wide, you can see the whole.
The only thing that can be done is to watch the trickiness of the mind. Don’t try to do the opposite. For example, your mind is filled with thoughts. Don’t try to fight with them because this fighter is the mind. If you fight, the mind will claim the opposite. He will say, “Look! I have dropped all thoughts. Now, where is your God? Where is enlightenment?”
Don’t do the opposite, don’t create a fight because with the fight comes the claim. Simply watch and relax. Simply watch and enjoy the trickiness of the mind. Just enjoy it; how it comes again and again. So beautiful, deceptive, elusive. Hindus have always said that it is just like the tail of the dog; you can keep it straight for twelve years or so, but the moment you stop the effort, it is crooked again.

One day, a small child was talking to me and said, “We are trying so hard to straighten out a friend because he doesn’t believe in Santa Claus.” Some days later he said, “After seven days of trying, he has yielded and said, ‘Okay, I believe.’” The next day the boy came again and said, “Now we need even more effort.”
So I asked, “What’s the matter? Just the other day you said you had straightened him out. Why do you need more effort?”
He replied, “He is crooked again. We straightened him out, but he has become crooked again and again.”

This is the nature of the mind. You cannot do anything about it because this is the nature of the mind. Understand it, that’s all. Understanding is enough. Otherwise it is a hard thing to attain. You can go on and on and the mind will go with you like a shadow; whatever you claim will be the mind’s claim. That’s why all the knowers have said, “Those who claim that they have known, have not known. Those who say that they have achieved, have not achieved.” Why? – because the very claim is dangerous.
Unless you expect the unexpected
you will never find the truth,
for it is hard to discover
and hard to attain.

Nature loves to hide.
It is a game of hide-and-seek. It is beautiful as it is. Nature is not on the surface, it is hidden in the center. Nature is like the roots of the trees, deep underground; the most essential is hidden. Never think that the tree is the most essential. The tree is just the periphery where the flowers, leaves, and fruits appear; it is the periphery. The real tree exists underground in the dark. It is hidden in the dark womb of the earth. You can cut down the tree and a new one will come. Cut the roots and everything disappears.
You are not on the surface of your skin; that is the periphery. You are deep, hidden underground. God is not on the surface. Science goes on learning more and more about the surface, learning more and more about the skin. However deep science goes, it never really goes that deep because it learns from the outside. You can only learn about the skin from the outside. The real is hidden on the inside, in the innermost shrine. It is hidden in the innermost shrine of you also. You live on the periphery, you miss it. Existence has a center; that center is hidden.
Nature loves to hide. Why? Why does nature love to hide? – because it is a game. You must have played hide-and-seek when you were young. For Heraclitus, existence is a game; it is a leela, a play. It hides and it is beautiful; you have to discover it. With the very effort to discover, you grow.
There are two types of people. The first type I call non-discoverers; they remain on the periphery. The second type I call discoverers; they move toward the center. People who live on the periphery are the worldly people. The market, politics, success, achievement is the periphery. They are non-discoverers, non-adventurers. Even if they go to the moon, it is not an adventure because they remain on the periphery. The real adventure is religious. It is to move to the very center of being. First you have to move in yourself because you are a miniature world. You move to your center and from that center you have the first glimpse of how things are.
The real is hidden.
On the periphery are waves, on the periphery are dreams; being on the periphery is just a show. Deep inside, in the innermost core of existence, is the hidden one. That’s what Heraclitus calls, “the hidden harmony.”
Move toward the being, the center, the very ground. Always seek the roots. Don’t be befooled by the foliage. But you are befooled by the foliage. If a woman is beautiful on the surface, you fall in love; you have fallen in love with the foliage. But the woman may not be beautiful inside; she may be absolutely ugly. You are trapped. There is an inner grace when the light burns inside; when the light comes to the periphery, you cannot see from where it is coming. You can see a beautiful woman and yet ugly. You can see just the opposite happening: an ugly woman and yet beautiful. When an ugly woman is beautiful, you cannot find the source, you cannot find where it is coming from because on the surface the skin, structure, physiology, is not attractive, but something inner attracts you. When it happens that the woman is beautiful on the surface and also in the inner being, it is very mysterious. Charisma happens. Sometimes you feel a charisma around a particular person. Charisma means that now there is some hidden harmony between the surface and the center; the personality has a magnetism, something of the divine.
This meeting of the periphery with the center is a hidden harmony.
Nature loves to hide. Why? – because only through hiding can the play go on and on; otherwise, the play will stop. The game continues, it is an eternal game.
Remember, even if you have found, the game continues, but the game has a different quality. Never think for a moment that when you have found the innermost core, the game stops. No, the game continues. Now, knowingly, many times you move away from the hidden center; knowingly you give nature a chance to hide again, but now it is knowingly. It is just like two children playing and one knows where the other is hiding. He runs around and around everywhere, searching, just to give the game a quality. He knows where you are hiding, he can simply go and catch you, but he will go around and around.
Buddhas continue to play, but the game changes. Now they know there is no anxiety. Now there is no desire, nothing to be achieved. Now it is a simple game. There is no goal to it; it continues.
So there are two possibilities. One is an ignorant game; that is what is happening to you. You take the game very seriously because you are ignorant. Seriousness becomes a disease. You become sad about it. People come to me. They are very serious and feel frustrated because when they meditate they are not attaining anything. I say, “Don’t be frustrated because that is the whole point to be understood – it is a game! There is no hurry to finish it. It is not a business. Let it go on as long as possible. Why be in such a hurry? Why be so tense? There is no hurry; infinity and eternal time is there. You will always be there and the game will always be there; it has always been there and will always be there.”
Take it easily! Take it easy! Any moment it can be discovered; it is always by the side. Why be in such a hurry? Relax. If you can relax, you reach the center sooner. If you are in a hurry, you remain on the surface because a hurried, tense state of mind cannot move to the deeper realms of being. Only patience helps you to settle to the bottom, to the very bottom. Nature loves to hide. It is beautiful that nature loves to hide. Nature is not an exhibitionist. The expression of the foliage is just a way to hide. God is hiding in a flower, in a subtle way. If you simply see the flower, you miss.
The English poet, Tennyson, has said and said absolutely rightly, “If I can understand a flower in its totality, I will understand God.” He is right. If you can understand a pebble on the shore in its totality, you will understand God because these are all hiding places. A flower is a hiding place; a pebble is also a hiding place. He is hiding everywhere, in millions of forms. Wherever you are, he is there in all forms around you. Any form can become a door. Once you have the readiness to enter, once you are not expecting it, once you are not desiring it, once you are not asking for something, projecting something ? suddenly the door is open.
The Lord whose oracle is at Delphi
neither speaks nor conceals –
but gives signs.
At Delphi there is an old Greek shrine and people used to go there to ask a question. The oracle never said anything, it simply gave signs. Heraclitus is using that as a parable. He says, “God, the total, the whole, never speaks in terms of yes or no; he simply gives signs.” He is poetic. He gives you symbols. Don’t try to interpret them. If you interpret, you will miss. Just watch and let the sign go deeper in you and be imprinted on the heart. Don’t try to find the meaning immediately because who will find the meaning? If you find the meaning, it will be your meaning. Just let the sign, the symbol, be imprinted on your heart and someday life will reveal the meaning. You simply live with it, you simply let it be there.
For example, you come to me and ask, “How is my meditation going?” You ask me, I smile; I have given you a sign. Now what will you do about it? ? you can interpret it. That is the first tendency of the mind. You will think, “Okay, he smiles; that means I am achieving something. He says ‘Yes’ so everything is okay. I am on the right path.” Your ego feels fulfilled. This will be the interpretation if you are in a positive mood. If you are in a negative mood, you will think, “He smiles; he doesn’t say ‘Yes.’ He was polite. I am going nowhere.”
Either way, you missed because if there was a yes to be said, I would have said it. I would not have put you in so much trouble finding the interpretation. If there was a yes to be said, I would have said it. If there was a no to be said, I would have said it. But I have simply smiled. I have neither said yes nor no. In fact, I haven’t said anything; I have given you a sign. Don’t interpret it. Let this smile move deeper in your heart. Let this smile be there. Remember it sometimes and put it back in your heart. Let it dissolve in you, don’t try to find the meaning; this will help your meditation. Suddenly, one day, in a deep meditative state, you will start smiling the same way I smiled because that moment will be the moment of understanding. You laugh because you will know what the meaning was.
Life is subtle. Yes and no cannot be used. Life is so subtle that if you say yes you falsify it, if you say no you falsify it. Language is very poor. It knows only two things: yes or no. Life is very rich; it knows infinite postures, positions, infinite gradations between yes and no. It is a spectrum of many, many millions of colors. Yes and no are very poor; you say nothing. Yes and no means you have divided life into black and white; life has millions of colors, it is a rainbow.
In fact black and white are not colors. All colors exist, except black and white. You must understand this; black is the absence of all colors, it is not a color. When there is no color present, the emptiness is blackness. It is not a color in itself. That’s why you don’t find black in nature. It is not much; it is an absence. White is not a color either, it is a mixture of all colors. If you mix all the colors it becomes white. It is not a color. White is one pole, black is the other. The presence of all colors is white, the absence of all colors is black. Between these two polarities real colors exist: green, red, yellow and all the shades of them, millions of shades.
When I smile, I am not saying black or white, yes or no. I am giving you a color in the spectrum, a real color. Don’t try to interpret it because if you do, you will say that it is either black or white and it is neither. It is somewhere in between and it is so subtle that words cannot express it. If words could express it, I would have given you a word. I wouldn’t unnecessarily put you in trouble.
You come to me and say something and I don’t answer. Sometimes you come to see me and I don’t even ask; I simply forget about you. I ask others and simply drop you out of the count. You will interpret it. Why? ? don’t interpret. Just let this gesture be deep in you. Someday, in a very, very meditative mood, the meaning will flower. I am sowing seeds in you, not giving you words and theories.
When I am gone, please remember me as a poet, not as a philosopher. Poetry has to be understood in a different way; you have to love poetry, not interpret it. You have to repeat the poetry many times so it mixes with your blood, your bones, with your very marrow. You have to chant poetry many times so that you can feel all the nuances and subtle shades of it. You have to simply sit and let the poetry move within you so it becomes a live force. You digest it and forget about it; it moves deeper and deeper and deeper and changes you.
Let me be remembered as a poet. Of course, I am not writing poetry in words. I am writing poetry in a more alive medium – in you. That’s what the whole of existence is doing.
Heraclitus says: The Lord whose oracle is at Delphi neither speaks nor conceals – but gives signs. A sign is not to be interpreted. A sign is to be lived through. The temptation of your mind is to interpret. Don’t be tempted by the mind. Just say to it, “This is not your field, this is not for you. You play with other things. Let this go deeper in my being.” That’s what I’m doing while I’m talking to you.
I am not talking to your minds; I am talking to you as beings, as luminous beings; as gods incarnate, as possibilities, as infinite potentialities. I am talking to your future, not to your past. Your past is rubbish, throw it away! Don’t carry it. I am talking to your future; the unexpected, the unknown. By and by, you will become capable of listening to this music; the music of the unknown, the music in which all the opposites disappear and a hidden harmony arises.
Yes, nature loves to hide because nature is a mystery. It is not a question, it is not a puzzle to be solved. It is a mystery to be lived, enjoyed, celebrated.
Enough for today.