---
title: The Transmission of Lamp 01
series: The Transmission of Lamp 01-46
talk_number: 1
url: https://oshoworld.com/the-transmission-of-lamp-01
language: English
duration: 01:23:23
author: THE WORLD TOUR
scraped_at: 2026-01-03T09:34:26.663088+00:00
---
Osho,
With my friend, meditation, I clean the skeletons from the closet.
With my friend, trust, I enter the dark basement and sweep it clean of ancient dust.
With my friend, the heart, I open all the windows and allow the fresh breezes in.
With my friend, awareness, I light candles in every room. In the kitchen, my friend, patience, prepares the tea.
In the garden, I sit with my friend, the master, and wait silently, for I know that the guest will soon be here.
Osho, when the doorbell rings, will I be there to answer it?
The guest always comes; its coming is certain. The bell also rings. The door is also always opened, without fail.
But the moment you open the door, you are not there. Existence is, being is, but you are not. The way you have known yourself up to now is no longer there, and what is there cannot be named, cannot be defined. It is all and everything…it is the very essence of existence.
You will not be there as you think yourself to be.
If you are there, then the guest cannot enter in.
In fact, the guest can come only when it becomes a certainty that you are ready to disappear. Your disappearance is the appearance of that which you have been seeking all along. This is a paradox: when the sought is found, the seeker is lost.
There are these words of Jesus – in some sense significant, but in a very much deeper way, not right. He says, “Seek, and ye shall find” – just a small sentence, “Seek, and ye shall find” – and every word is wrong, because if seeking continues, there is desire, there is longing. Seeking must stop, must disappear. “Seek, and ye shall find it.” You cannot find it; it will be found, but you cannot be the finder.
And it is the same with the other sentences that follow. They are beautiful sentences, very poetic – “Ask, and it shall be given to you” – but every word is wrong. Unless you stop asking, nothing can be given to you. Ask, and you will go on missing; stop asking, and it is there. It has always been there – you could not see it because your eyes were so full of asking. “Ask, and it shall be given to you” – again, to you? To you, nothing is possible; you are the barrier, you are the hindrance. You have to dissolve into the whole, just like a dewdrop disappears in the ocean.
And the third sentence is also beautiful: “Knock, and the door shall be opened unto you.” But all the words are wrong. You are not to knock; even that much effort on your part will not allow you to be totally relaxed. And the door is not closed, so there is no need to knock. If you are knocking, it must be before a wall, not before a door. The door of the divine is always open; you just go on knocking here and there.
“Knock, and it shall be opened unto you.” Who is there to open it? There is no God; that there is a God is presumably the idea behind Jesus’ sentence. But there is no one to open it – and particularly to you. If you are not, you suddenly find yourself at the door. And the door is open; it has always been open, so that you will not come and find it closed.
Existence is infinitely compassionate. Its doors cannot be closed; you are always welcome. But remember, when you come close to the door, take your shoes off, and with those shoes leave your idea of yourself also. Just enter as an innocent, just-born child, without any name.
These three sentences are beautiful, some of the best in the whole New Testament. But looked at through the experience of enlightenment, poetry is not the thing; it has to be reality.
So everything is right, just you are wrong. And the whole effort is to bring a state of being in you where you can say, “I am not.” Logically, you cannot use that sentence “I am not,” because who is denying? But existentially you can understand. There are moments when you are not and still you are. A beautiful sunset, a sky full of stars…for a moment you forget that you are, although you are, but in a totally new way – fresh, new, reborn.

Osho,
I am constantly criticizing myself and judging other people. This makes me feel divided and tense, and I cannot establish a real contact with people or nature. I want to open my heart and I don't know how to do it.
Please, could you say something about this?
Our whole education is so ugly, our whole upbringing is so wrong, that it takes away every possibility of your inner growth and gives you stupid ideas which have no relevance as far as your joy, your understanding and your maturity are concerned.
Every child is being told, in thousands of ways, to criticize himself, so this is not only your problem. He is always told he is wrong in everything. Slowly, slowly he catches the disease of criticizing himself. And a person who criticizes himself cannot forgive others. How can he forgive? – for the same reasons, he criticizes others. His whole life simply becomes a condemnation – condemn yourself, condemn others. Then love becomes impossible, friendship becomes impossible, and he simply suffers. And what he is criticizing is so absurd.
A young boy came running fast into the house, went directly into the kitchen and said to his mother, “My God! It must be God’s mercy that I am saved. A lion was following me from the school to the house. He is standing outside.”
The mother said, “How many millions of times have I told you not to exaggerate?” She is saying, “How many millions of times have I told you not to exaggerate? Where can you find a lion in the city?”
The boy said, “Perhaps out of fear it looked big. But it is certainly a very dangerous dog.”
The mother said, “Now you are coming to your senses. If it was dangerous you would not have been here.”
He said, “That’s true. In fact, it is a small dog.” But the child made the comment, “I was exaggerating, and that is wrong. What about you? You said, ‘How many millions of times have you told me….’”
I was staying in Calcutta in a friend’s house from where I was going to a conference. I was sitting with him in the car and we were waiting for his wife. He was honking the horn. She came very angrily to the window and said, “I have told you a thousand times that I am coming in a minute!”
I said to my friend, “This is something – a miracle. She has told you a thousand times that she is coming in a minute. In fact, in a minute, one cannot say it a thousand times. And she has again disappeared into the bathroom.”
The man said, “You don’t know how she exaggerates. And the disease has caught me too. Once in a while, I suddenly become aware that I am exaggerating and it is just my wife….”
Parents are doing everything for which they are criticizing the child. And he is watching – and his watchfulness is far more clear. His intelligence is still growing; he can see that the same thing for which he is wrong, the parents are right. They are watching television late into the night – they are right – and he should go to sleep before nine o’clock. Slowly, slowly he gets accustomed to these things and starts feeling, “Somehow I am wrong. Everything I do is wrong.”
I once asked my father, “Will you tell me some time, some day, just once, ‘What you are doing is right’? Can’t you see that it is impossible to do everything wrong for twenty-four hours a day, three hundred and sixty-five days a year…everything wrong? If it is true, I am really accomplishing something miraculous. Just make an exception – just one time say to me, ‘What you are doing is right.’”
He was shocked because he understood the meaning of what I was saying, that it is impossible that I could be doing everything wrong.
But parents enjoy the idea because it is very fulfilling: it is the lust for power. Whenever you say to somebody, “No,” whenever you say to somebody, “You are wrong,” you feel powerful. It feeds your ego and it feeds the ego of everybody – the teachers, the neighbors. Wherever the child goes, everybody is enjoying the lust for power, and the child is crushed. And when so many people are saying that he is wrong, naturally he has to believe it.
But remember, as a reaction, he starts judging others. When everybody else is judging him, there is no reason why he should not judge others. You are teaching him to judge, to judge everybody – and as much as possible to judge negatively. So he starts judging that others are wrong.
And this is our world – where everybody is judging himself as wrong and judging everybody else as wrong. How can you be loving, friendly, trusting? How can you open your heart? You will be isolated, you will be completely closed, you will live in a world which you condemn and the world will condemn you.
It is not a beautiful situation, but you have to understand: asking me, “How to open my heart?” is not the real question. The real question is how you managed to close it.
Stop judging.
Whatever you are doing, if you like doing it, do it. There is no question of judgment; nobody else has the right to say that what you are doing is wrong. If you enjoy it, you are not harming anybody, you are not disturbing anybody…but it is a strange world.
From my childhood I have always loved to just sit in a corner silently. Everybody who would pass by would say, “What are you doing?”
I would say, “Nothing.”
And everybody would say, “This is not good.”
I said, “This is strange: I am doing nothing, doing no harm to anybody – just sitting silently in this corner – and you say, ‘This is not right.’ It seems it has just become your habit to condemn, to criticize. But I am enjoying sitting here doing nothing, and I am going to continue it in spite of your judgment. I have not asked for your advice, and to give advice unasked for is unwise.”
Slowly, slowly one has to assert oneself, to make one’s point clear. Unless I trespass on somebody else’s rights – if I am doing something which I am enjoying and I don’t see it as harmful in any way – then I will not allow anybody to judge me, because it is not only a question of this act, it is a question of my whole life. You are teaching me a very subtle disease of judging. And when I condemn myself, how can I leave anybody else uncondemned?
It is said that Mulla Nasruddin used to come to his house, and every day there was trouble. His wife was suspicious – as all wives are – that he was having an affair with some other woman, because going out of the house he looked so happy and went so fast; coming home he looked sad. Certainly there was something outside the house which attracted him. So when he used to put his coat on the hanger, she would look on his coat, on his shirt, to see if she could find any hair or anything else to prove that he had been with some other woman.
One day – for seven days she had been searching and she could not find a single hair – on the seventh day, she burst out crying, screaming, “This is too much. Now you have started going with bald women!”
Now, it is very difficult to find a bald woman – almost impossible. I have seen only one woman who was semi-bald, not bald. But for seven days, no hair? The conclusion is clear, that he has fallen so low that he is now going with bald women. “Can’t you find a woman with hair?”
If a husband is sitting silently, then the wife is angry. If he is reading the newspaper, the wife is angry; she will snatch the newspaper and say, “I am here and you are reading the newspaper as if I don’t exist.”
Everybody is so miserable that he wants to find some reason somewhere to explain to himself why he is miserable, why she is miserable. And the society has given you a good strategy: judge.
First, naturally, you judge yourself in every way. No man is perfect, and no man can ever be perfect – perfection does not exist – so judgment is very easy. You are imperfect, so there are things which show your imperfection. And then you are angry, angry with yourself, angry with the whole world: “Why am I not perfect?”
Then you look with only one idea – to find imperfection in everybody. And then you want to open your heart – naturally, because unless you open your heart, there is no celebration in your life; your life is almost dead. But you cannot do it directly; you will have to destroy all this upbringing from the very roots.
So the first thing is, stop judging yourself. Instead of judging, start accepting yourself with all your imperfections, all your frailties, all your mistakes, all your failures. Don’t ask yourself to be perfect. That is simply asking for something impossible, and then you will feel frustrated. You are a human being after all.
Just look at the animals, at the birds; nobody is worried, nobody is sad, nobody is frustrated. You don’t see a buffalo freaking out. He is perfectly contented chewing the same grass every day. He is almost enlightened. There is no tension; there is a tremendous harmony with nature, with himself, with everything as it is. Buffaloes don’t make parties to revolutionize the world, to change buffaloes into super buffaloes, to make buffaloes religious, virtuous. No animal is concerned at all with human ideas.
And they all must be laughing: “What has happened to you? Why can’t you be just yourself as you are? What is the need to be somebody else?”
So the first thing is a deep acceptance of yourself.
I was constantly asked by my teachers, “Don’t you ever feel that you are mischievous?”
I said, “I am perfectly contented. This is the way I am, and I don’t want to be anybody else.”
They said, “This is strange because things that you do must make you feel guilty.”
I said, “For what?”
One of my teachers was constantly talking about fearlessness – that he was a man of fearlessness, that he could go in the darkest night into the thickest forest. Listening to him again and again I said, “I am suspicious – because you are talking so much about your fearlessness. And what fearlessness is this, going into the dark night, into the thickest forest? This is not great bravery. My feeling is that you are a perfect coward.”
He was very angry; he said, “You will have to prove it.”
I said, “I will prove it. When I say it, it means I will prove it.” And I could immediately see that he started perspiring.
That night I proved it. He used to live in a small house with mud tiles on it – I knew where he used to sleep – so I just went on top of the house, removed one tile, and I dropped a fake rubber snake tied to a rope, slowly, slowly, until it touched his face.
Once or twice he threw it off, and again and again the snake came back. Then he opened his eyes, half asleep in the middle of the night…and a long snake and the face just…and he screamed. I have never heard such a scream; that was a real primal scream. I had to take my snake and run away.
Next day he came to class, but his legs were still trembling; the fear of the snake touching his face…. He started teaching and I said, “First things first.”
He said, “What first things?”
I said, “What about last night? You wanted something to be proved.”
He said, “So you were behind it?”
I said, “I was not behind it, I was just watching what the snake was doing to you.”
He said, “You were there?”
I said, “I know the whole story; you cannot hide it. I even know about your scream which woke up the whole neighborhood; everybody knows.”
“But,” he said, “you are saying it so definitely – because they must have heard a scream; but when they all came in, the snake had gone. We saw that one tile was removed, so the snake must have got away.”
I said, “You are right: that was the place from where it came and through where it got out. And if you really want the proof….” I pulled out the snake from my bag and I showed him that this is the snake. “You are such a fearless man, and this is only a rubber snake. And it just touched your face – two, three times, not much – and such a scream came out of you. I was not expecting that it would create so much fear in you.”
He was so ashamed that that very evening he resigned and escaped from town, because everybody was asking him, “What happened with the snake? Was it real? – because somebody said that it was just a rubber snake and that some boy in your class had accepted your challenge.” The whole town was talking, and it became so difficult for him that he escaped.
He met me ten years later on a railway station. He tried not to recognize me. I said, “Don’t try not to recognize me because I still have the snake in my bag. I have been in search of you for ten years. I have been keeping it with me. Where have you been for ten years?”
He said, “Talk silently. Don’t speak so loudly, because in this small place I have become a teacher and I don’t want the same story to be spread here. And why have you come here?”
I said, “I have not come here, I’m just passing through by train, and the train is waiting for some other train to pass by. Seeing you, I got out. But what about your fearlessness?”
He said, “I have dropped the idea. One good thing you did was to make me free of a false idea that I am fearless. You made it clear to me that it is my fear that I am repressing with the idea of fearlessness. I was angry with you, but now I feel grateful. You did well.”
I said, “I enjoyed it enough. I don’t need any gratitude, any thankfulness from you.”
He also asked, “Don’t you feel sometimes that you are doing things that are not right?”
I said, “I have never felt that. I simply do things which I like. In this short life, who is going to bother and waste time wondering whether it is right or not? I just do not harm anybody. I did not harm you. That scream that escaped from you was good; it must have cleansed your whole being. It must have taken much of the rubbish from inside you with it.”
I have never judged, so I don’t exactly know the experience. When you say that you judge yourself, it is borrowed. People have judged you, and you have accepted their idea without any scrutiny. You are suffering from all kinds of people’s judgments, and you are throwing those judgments on other people. And this game has grown all out of proportion; the whole of humanity is suffering from it.
If you want to get out of it, the first thing is: don’t judge yourself. Accept humbly your imperfection, your failures, your mistakes, your frailties. There is no need to pretend otherwise. Just be yourself: “This is how I am, full of fear. I cannot go into the dark night, I cannot go into the thick forest.” What is wrong in it? – it is just human.
Once you accept yourself, you will be able to accept others because you will have a clear insight that they are suffering from the same disease. And your accepting of them will help them to accept themselves.
We can reverse the whole process: accept yourself. That makes you capable of accepting others. And because somebody accepts them, they learn the beauty of acceptance for the first time – how peaceful it feels – and they start accepting others.
If the whole humanity comes to a point where everybody is accepted as he is, almost ninety percent of misery will simply disappear – it has no foundation – and your hearts will open of their own accord and your love will be flowing.
Right now, how can you love? When you see so many wrongs, so many weaknesses, how can you love? You want somebody perfect. Nobody is perfect, so you have to accept a state of no-love, or accept that it doesn’t matter whether somebody is imperfect. Love can be shared, shared with all kinds of people. Don’t make demands.
Judgment is ugly; it hurts people. On the one hand, you go on hurting, wounding them, and on the other hand, you want their love, their respect. It is impossible.
Love them, respect them, and perhaps your love and respect may help them to change many of their weaknesses, many of their failures – because love will give them a new energy, a new meaning, a new strength. Love will give them new roots to stand against strong winds, a hot sun, heavy rains.
If just a single person loves you, it makes you so strong that you cannot imagine it. But if nobody loves you in this vast world, you are just isolated; then you think you are free, but you are living in an isolation cell in a jail. It is just that the isolation cell is invisible; you carry it with you.
The heart will open by itself. Don’t be worried about the heart. Just do the primary spade work.

Osho,
To me, you house a paradox. You embody the essence both of eternity and of the here and now.
Around you I feel a sense of something that has always been and will always be, something that I have always known – although I am not aware of what it is exactly. At the same time, whenever I see you, it is so delightfully new and fresh…As though it were the first time I had seen you. But the first time I actually ever did see you in Pune, I felt as though I had always known you.
Osho, am I also going crazy?
You are not going crazy, Maneesha – because you are already crazy. But to be crazy here with me is to taste sanity for the first time.
It is true that there is a paradox. You can feel at the same time in my presence, the intensity, the depth of the present moment, of the herenow, and – very illogically – the essential, the eternal, which has always been and always will be. But the paradox is only apparent – all paradoxes are only apparent – because to be here and now is the door to eternity.
To experience this moment is to experience, at the same time, all that has been and all that will be, because this moment contains both. It contains the whole past, because where will the past go? – it goes on and on entering into the present moment. And it contains the whole future, because from where will the future come? – it will grow from this moment, from the next moment and the next moment and from the whole eternity.
The present moment is a seed which has all the trees of the past…generations and generations of trees. This seed has not come from nowhere, it has come from a tree. That tree had come from another seed, that seed had come from another tree. If you go backwards, the seed will take you to the very beginnings – if there were any beginnings.
It has been forever here.
And this seed also contains the future trees. From this seed will grow a new tree, and from that tree will grow thousands of seeds and thousands of trees. A single seed can make the whole earth green…or, it can even be said that it can make the whole universe green. So much is contained in a small seed.
This present moment is a seed of time.
It is invisible. That’s why we don’t know what it contains.
It contains the whole past; it contains the whole future. That’s why I insist: Don’t think of the past, don’t think of the future. Just remain in the present moment, and the whole past is yours and the whole future is yours.
Because of this paradox you feel in my presence as if you are seeing me for the first time; and when you saw me for the first time, years before, you had the feeling as if you had always known me. But it is an extension of the same paradox; it is not different.
We are always seeing each other for the first time, and we have known each other forever – because change is the only unchanging reality in existence…and particularly with a man like me, who does not live logically, who has no respect for any logic, who never bothers about whether this statement will contradict some other statement. In fact, I don’t remember which statements I have made before, so it is very easy for me: each statement is fresh, and I don’t compare it.
So you may have listened to me for years, but still you will find me fresh, for the simple reason that I don’t have any remembrance of what I have said in all the yesterdays that have passed. I don’t exactly know what is going to be my next sentence.
These are not prepared lectures of a professor in a university or prepared sermons of a priest in a church. I am simply responding to your silence, to your questions, to the implications of your questions. You may have asked the same question thousands of times, but my answer is not going to be the same – because everything goes on changing. You have changed a lot, I have changed a lot. The question may seem to be the same, but it is not the same, because it is coming from a different person who has changed.
Ten years have passed; in ten years one cannot remain the same. And certainly the answer cannot be the same, because I go on moving each moment with life; I don’t lag behind. I have no investment in any system, I have no desire to be respected as a consistent thinker. I am simply playing with words. But my work is somewhere else; it is with your heart, and it is, every day, fresh.
So both are possible: from one angle you can see me as new; from another angle, as very ancient – you have always known me.
One more reason: whatever I am saying is phrased in a totally spontaneous way, but it contains the ancientmost truths ever uttered by any human being on the earth. So those who can understand can see that what I am saying has always been said by the mystics, and yet, every day I am saying something in such a way as it has never been said before. So there is a newness and freshness – and there is a deep, long ancientness in it.
But there is no paradox. All paradoxes are only apparent. At least with me, there cannot be anything paradoxical because there is nothing paradoxical in my being. My being is so harmonious that contradictory statements cannot arise out of it. So I don’t bother about statements. I know my being, I know its harmony.
And to be crazy in this mystery school is the only way now to be sane in this mad world. So the day I give you the certificate that you are crazy means you have passed the examination.

============================================================

Osho,
In the olden days it was called melancholia; today it is called depression, and it counts as one of the major psychological problems of developed countries. It is described as a sense of despair or hopelessness, a lack of self-esteem with no enthusiasm or interest in the surroundings. In addition, there are physical symptoms of poor appetite, sleeplessness and a loss of sexual energy. Electroshock treatment has largely been abandoned today, and drugs or talk therapy seem equally effective – or ineffective. Explanations for depression have varied from the chemical to the psychological.
Osho, what is this depression? Is it a reaction to a depressing world, a kind of hibernation during “the winter of our discontent”? Is depression just a reaction to repression – or oppression – or is it just a form of self-repression?
Man has always lived with hope, a future, a paradise somewhere far away. He has never lived in the present…his golden age is still to come. It kept him enthusiastic because greater things were going to happen; all his longings were going to be fulfilled. There was great joy in anticipation.
He suffered in the present; he was miserable in the present. But all that was completely forgotten in the dreams that were going to be fulfilled tomorrow. Tomorrow has always been life-giving.
But the situation has changed. The old situation was not good because the tomorrow – the fulfillment of his dreams – never became true. He died hoping. Even in his death he was hoping for a future life – but he never actually experienced any rejoicing, any meaning. But it was tolerable. It was only a question of today: it will pass, and tomorrow is bound to come.
The religious prophets, messiahs, saviors were promising him all pleasures – which are condemned here – in paradise. The political leaders, the social ideologists, the utopians were promising him the same thing – not in paradise but here on earth, somewhere far away in the future when the society goes through a total revolution and there is no poverty, no classes, no government and man is absolutely free and has everything that he needs.
Both are basically fulfilling the same psychological need. To those who were materialistic, the ideological, political, sociological utopians were appealing; to those who were not so materialistic, the religious leaders appealed. But the object of appeal was exactly the same: all that you can imagine, can dream of, can long for, will be absolutely fulfilled. With those dreams, the present miseries seemed to be very small.
There was enthusiasm in the world; people were not depressed. Depression is a contemporary phenomenon and it has come into being because now there is no tomorrow.
All political ideologies have failed. There is no possibility that man will ever be equal, no possibility that there will be a time when there will be no government, no possibility that all your dreams will be fulfilled.
This has come as a great shock. Simultaneously man has become more mature. He may go to the church, to the mosque, to the synagogue, to the temple – but they are only social conformities, because he does not want, in such a dark and depressed state, to be left alone; he wants to be with the crowd. But basically he knows there is no paradise; he knows that no savior is going to come.
Hindus have waited five thousand years for Krishna. He promised not only that he would come once, he promised that whenever there would be misery, suffering, whenever vice would be on top of virtue, whenever nice and simple and innocent people would be exploited by the cunning and the hypocritical, he would come. Sambhavami yuge yuge: “I will make myself a reality in every age to come.” But for five thousand years no sign has been seen of him.
Jesus has promised he will come, and when asked when, he said, “Very soon.” I can stretch “very soon,” but not for two thousand years; that is too much.
The idea that our misery, our pain, our anguish will be taken away is no more appealing. The idea that there is a God who cares for us seems to be simply a joke. Looking at the world, it doesn’t seem as if there is anybody who cares.
In fact, in England there are almost thirty thousand people who are devil worshippers – just in England, a small part of the world. And their ideology is worth looking at in reference to your question. They say that the devil is not against God, the devil is God’s son. God has abandoned the world, and now the only hope is to persuade the devil to take care as God is not taking care. And thirty thousand people are worshipping the devil as a son of God…and the reason is they feel that God has abandoned the world – he no more cares about it. Naturally, the only way is to appeal to his son; if somehow he can be persuaded by rituals, by prayer, by worship, perhaps the misery, the darkness, the sickness can be removed.
This is a desperate effort.
The reality is that man has always lived in poverty. Poverty has one thing beautiful about it: it never destroys your hope, it never goes against your dreams, it always brings enthusiasm for tomorrow. One is hopeful, believing that things will be better: this dark period is already passing; soon there will be light.
But that situation has changed. In the developed countries…and remember, the problem of depression is not in undeveloped countries – in the poor countries, people are still hopeful – it is only in the developed countries, where they have everything that they had always longed for. Now paradise will not do anymore; nor can a classless society help anymore. No utopia is going to be better. They have achieved the goal – and this achievement of the goal is the cause of depression. Now there is no hope: tomorrow is dark, and the day after tomorrow will be even darker.
And all these things that they have dreamed of were very beautiful. They had never looked at the implications of them. Now that they have got them, they have got them with the implications. A man is poor, but he has an appetite. A man is rich, but he has no appetite. And it is better to be poor and have an appetite than to be rich and have no appetite. What are you going to do with all your gold, all your silver, all your dollars? You cannot eat them.
You have everything, but the appetite has disappeared for which you have been struggling all along. You succeeded – and I have said again and again that nothing fails like success. You have reached a place that you wanted to reach, but you were not aware of the by-products. You have millions of dollars, but you cannot sleep.
When Alexander was in India he met a naked saint in the desert.
He declared: “I am Alexander the Great!”
The saint said, “You cannot be.”
He said, “What nonsense! I am saying it myself, and you can see my armies all over the place.”
He said, “I see your armies, but one who calls himself ‘The Great’ has not yet reached to greatness, because greatness makes people humble, as it is such a failure, an utter failure.”
Alexander was a disciple of Aristotle and he was trained by him in fine logic. He could not listen to all this mystic garbage. He said, “I don’t believe all these things. I have conquered the whole world.”
The naked man said, “If in this desert you are thirsty, and I offer you a glass of water, how much would you be able to give me for it? – and for miles there is no water.”
Alexander said, “I would give you half of my kingdom.”
The saint said, “No, I will not sell it for half of the kingdom. Either you can have the kingdom or you can have the glass of water. And you are thirsty and you are dying and there are no possibilities of finding water anywhere – what will you do?”
He said, “Then naturally, I will give you the whole kingdom.”
The saint laughed; he said, “So that is the price of your whole kingdom – just a glass of water! And you think you have conquered the whole world? From today start saying you have conquered a whole glass of water.”
When man reaches to the cherished goals, then he becomes aware that there are many things around them. For example, for your whole life you try to earn money, thinking that one day when you have it, you will live a relaxed life. But you have been tense your whole life – tension has become your discipline – and at the end of life, when you have achieved all the money you wanted, you cannot relax. The whole life disciplined in tension and anguish and worry won’t let you relax.
So you are not a winner, you are a loser. You lose your appetite, you destroy your health, you destroy your sensibility, your sensitiveness. You destroy your aesthetic sense – because there is no time for all these things which do not produce dollars.
You are running after dollars – who has time to look at the roses? and who has time to look at the birds on the wing? and who has time to look at the beauty of human beings?
You postpone all these things so that one day, when you have everything, you will relax and enjoy. But by the time you have everything, you have become a certain kind of disciplined person – who is blind to roses, who is blind to beauty, who cannot enjoy music, who cannot understand dance, who cannot understand poetry, who can only understand dollars. But those dollars give no satisfaction.
This is the cause of depression. That’s why it is only in the developed countries and only in the richer class of the developed countries – in the developed countries, there are poor people also, but they don’t suffer from depression – and now you cannot give a man any more hope to remove his depression because he has all, more than you can promise.
His condition is really pitiable. He never thought of implications, he never thought of by-products, he never thought of what he would lose by gaining money. He never thought that he would lose everything that could make him happy just because he has always pushed all those things aside. He had no time and the competition was tough and he had to be tough. At the end he finds his heart is dead, his life is meaningless. He doesn’t see that there is any possibility in the future of any change, because “What more is there…?”
I used to stay in Sagar in a very rich man’s house. The old man was very beautiful. He was the greatest bidi manufacturer in the whole of India. He had everything that you can imagine, but he was absolutely unable to enjoy anything.
Enjoyment is something that has to be nourished. It is a certain discipline, a certain art – how to enjoy – and it takes time to get in contact with the great things in life.
But the man who is running after money bypasses everything that is a door to the divine, and he ends up at the end of the road and there is nothing ahead of him except death.
His whole life he was miserable. He tolerated it, ignored it in the hope that things were going to change. Now he cannot ignore it and cannot tolerate it because tomorrow there is only death and nothing else. And the whole life’s accumulated misery that he has ignored, the suffering that he has ignored, explodes in his being.
The richest man, in a way, is the poorest man in the world.
To be rich and not to be poor is a great art.
To be poor and to be rich is the other side of the art.
There are poor people whom you will find immensely rich. They don’t have anything, but they are rich. Their richness is not in things but in their being, in their multidimensional experiences.
And there are rich people who have everything but are absolutely poor and hollow and empty. Deep inside there is just a graveyard.
It is not a depression of the society because then it would affect the poor too; it is simply natural law, and man now will have to learn it. Up to now there was no need, because nobody had reached to a point where he had everything, while inside there was complete darkness and ignorance.
The first thing in life is to find meaning in the present moment.
The basic flavor of your being should be of love, of rejoicing, of celebration. Then you can do anything; dollars will not destroy it. But you put everything aside and simply run after dollars thinking that dollars can purchase everything. And then one day you find they cannot purchase anything – and you have devoted your whole life to dollars.
This is the cause of depression.
And particularly in the West, the depression is going to be very deep. In the East, there have been rich people, but there was a certain dimension available. When the road to richness came to an end, they did not remain stuck there; they moved into a new direction. That new direction was in the air, available for centuries.
In the East the poor have been in a very good condition, and the rich have been in a tremendously good condition. The poor have learned contentment so they do not bother about running after ambition. And the rich have understood that one day you have to renounce it all and go in search of truth, in search of meaning.
In the West, at the end, the road simply ends. You can go back, but going back will not help your depression. You need a new direction.
Gautam Buddha, Mahavira, or Parshvanatha – these people were at the peak of richness, and then they saw that it is almost a burden. Something else has to be found before death takes you over – and they were courageous enough to renounce all.
Their renunciation has been misunderstood. They renounced it all because they did not want to bother a single second more for money, for power – because they have seen the top, and there is nothing there. They went to the very highest rung of the ladder and found that it leads nowhere; it is just a ladder leading nowhere.
While you are somewhere in the middle, or lower than the middle, you have a hope because there are other rungs higher than you. There comes a point when you are on the highest rung and there is only suicide or madness – or hypocrisy: you go on smiling till death finishes you, but deep down you know that you have wasted your life.
In the East depression has never been a problem. The poor learned to enjoy whatsoever little they had, and the rich learned that having the whole world at your feet means nothing – you have to go in a search for meaning, not for money.
And they had precedents: for thousands of years people have gone in search of truth and have found it. There is no need to be in despair, in depression – you just have to move into an unknown dimension. They have never explored it – but as they start exploring the new dimension, it means a journey inwards, a journey to their own self. All that they have lost starts returning.
The West needs very urgently a great movement of meditation; otherwise, this depression is going to kill people. And these people will be the talented ones – because they achieved power, they achieved money, they achieved whatsoever they wanted…the highest degrees in education. These are the talented people – and they are all feeling despair.
This is going to be dangerous because the most talented people are no more enthusiastic about life, and the untalented are enthusiastic about life but they don’t even have the talents to get power, money, education, respectability. They don’t have the talents, so they are suffering, feeling handicapped. They are turning into terrorists, they are turning towards unnecessary violence just out of revenge – because they cannot do anything else. But they can destroy.
And the rich are almost ready to hang themselves from any tree because there is no reason for them to live. Their hearts have stopped beating long before. They are just corpses – well decorated, well honored, but utterly empty and futile.
The West is really in a far worse condition than the East – although to those who don’t understand, it seems that the West is in a better condition than the East because the East is poor. But poverty is not as big of a problem as is the failure of richness; then a man is really poor. An ordinary poor man at least has dreams, hopes, but the rich man has nothing.
What is needed is a great meditation movement reaching to every person.
And in the West these people who are depressed are going to psychoanalysts, therapists and all kinds of charlatans who are themselves depressed, more depressed than their patients – naturally, because the whole day they are hearing about depression, despair, meaninglessness. And seeing so many talented people in such a bad state, they themselves start losing their spirit. They cannot help; they themselves need help.
The function of my school is going to be to prepare people with meditative energy and send them into the world just as examples for those who are depressed. If they can see that there are people who are not depressed – but on the contrary, who are immensely joyous – perhaps a hope may be born into them. Now they can have everything and there is no need to worry.
They can meditate.
I don’t teach renunciation of your wealth or of anything. Let everything be as it is. Just add one thing more to your life. Up to now you have been adding only things to your life. Now add something to your being – and that will do the music, that will do the miracle, that will do the magic, that will create a new thrill, a new youth, a new freshness.
It is not unsolvable. The problem is big, but the solution is very simple.

Osho,
Sometimes people have said that they see in my face that of a very old, hard witch. And I have felt inside me a deeply buried, revengeful, cold rage against all men who have ever forced, raped, killed or hurt women. This feels like something I have been carrying within for lives, and the realization of it is very painful. Is this some unknown part of myself, a mean personality in the closet? If so, please help me uncover and befriend this old witch.
The first thing to be clear about is that it was Christianity who condemned the word witch; otherwise, it was one of the most respected words, as respected as “mystic” – a wise man. It simply meant a wise woman, the parallel to a wise man.
But in the Middle Ages, Christianity came to face a danger. There were thousands of women who were far wiser than the bishops and the cardinals and the pope. They knew the art of transforming people’s lives.
Their whole philosophy was based on love and transformation of sexual energy – and a woman can do that more easily than a man. After all, she is a mother and she is always a mother. Even a small baby girl has the quality of motherliness.
The quality of motherliness is not something connected with age, it is part of womanhood. And the transformation needs a very loving atmosphere, a very motherly transfer of energies. To Christianity, it was a competitor. Christianity has nothing to offer in comparison to it – but Christianity was in power.
It was a man’s world up to then; and they decided to destroy all witches. But how to destroy them? It was not a question of killing one woman but thousands of women. So a special court was created for inquiry, to find out who was a witch.
Any woman said by Christians to have had an influence on people and who people respected was caught and tortured – so much so, that she had to confess. They wouldn’t stop torturing her until she confessed that she was a witch. And according to the Christian mind, to Christian theology, the meaning of witch was changed: a witch is one who is having a sexual relationship with the devil.
You don’t hear any more of any devil having a relationship with any woman. Either the devil has become a Christian monk, a celibate, or…what has happened to the devil? Who was it that was having sexual relationships with thousands of women? And these women were mostly old women. It doesn’t seem to be rational. When young and beautiful women were available, why should the devil go to the old, the very old women?
But to become a witch, it was a long training, a long discipline, a long experience. So by the time a woman was a witch – a wise woman – she was old; she had sacrificed everything to attain that wisdom, that alchemy.
They forced these poor old women into saying that they were having sexual intercourse with the devil. Many of them tried hard…but the torture was too much.
When my back had gone bad, Devaraj and other sannyasins trained in bodywork started traction on me. And I inquired, “What is traction? How was it invented?” They had no idea.
It was invented in the Middle Ages by Christians to torture the witches – to pull their bodies from both ends and to go on pulling to a point where it became unbearable. Many became unconscious; many died on their traction machine. But, by the way, it was found that many old women who were put into traction had had a back problem; when they got out of it, the back problem had disappeared. So now Christians don’t use it, but doctors do. Now it is part of the medical world.
They tortured these women in many ugly ways, just for one thing: they should confess. The women continued to try to say that they had nothing to do with the devil, that there was nothing to confess. But nobody listened to them; they went on torturing them.
You can make anybody confess anything if you go on torturing him. A point comes when he feels it is better to confess rather than to unnecessarily suffer the same torture every day. And it would have continued for his whole life. Once a woman confessed that she was a witch and was having a sexual relationship with the devil, her torture was stopped and then she was presented before a court – a special court made by the pope – and before the court she was to now confess. And once she confessed before the court, the court was able to punish her – because it is the greatest crime in the eyes of Christianity.
In fact, even if the woman was having a sexual relationship with the devil, it is none of the business of anybody else – and it is not a crime, because she is not harming anybody. And the devil has never complained to any police station, “That woman is dangerous.” On what authority was Christianity burning these women?
The only punishment was to be burned alive so that no other woman dared to be a witch again. They destroyed thousands of women and completely removed a very significant part of humanity. And the wisdom that those women contained – their books, their methods, their techniques of transforming man, transforming man’s energy….
So the first thing to be understood is: don’t think that witch is a bad word. It is more respectable than pope – because I don’t think a pope is a man who can be called wise; they are just parrots and nothing else. It is possible that it may be connected with your past life, and the wound has been so deep that still some remembrance in your unconscious goes on reminding you. And that creates the hate for men, because what was done to you was done by men.
So it is a simple association, but that association has to be dropped. It was not done by men, it was done by Christians. And the Christians have done so many crimes, and they go on doing them. It is unbelievable.
Just now in the United States, there is a case in the court against the Catholic church, because they cannot have a tax-exempt status if, in any way, they try to participate in politics. And they are participating in politics in every way. They have their lobbyists in the Senate, in the congress; even the president, Ronald Reagan, is a fundamentalist Christian, so they must be influencing him, because that is a fanatic section of Christianity.
The magistrate was convinced by all the evidence that was produced by a small group of liberated people – liberated from the slavery of Christianity – that these people are lobbying and influencing the law, influencing the government, and their tax-exempt status should be taken away.
The magistrate told them that they will be fined one hundred thousand dollars per day, for as long as they don’t answer. But this is how the world is: after seven days the magistrate changed his statement – “They will not be fined, they can simply answer.”
Now, that is again a proof that a pressure from higher sources is forcing him…that this is too much in a Christian country. That’s what Ronald Reagan thinks – that America is a Christian country and should respect Christian values, and this would be a condemnation of the whole Christian church. So no fine; they can simply answer whether it is true or not. But the thing is out; it cannot remain that way for long. They will have to accept the fact.
Our commune was destroyed by Christians hiding behind the politicians. They have money, they have votes, so any politician is vulnerable to their influence.
And all over the world they are doing ugly things. Ronald Reagan was going to give a large amount of war material to Saudi Arabia, which the congress rejected because it was strange – on one hand you go on giving war material to Israel, and on the other hand you give war material to the Mohammedan countries. On both sides your war material is being used, so you have found a good market. People will be killed, and your old-fashioned war material – which is of no use anymore – you can sell. Otherwise, what is one to do with that war material? Every day new things are happening, and the old becomes out-of-date.
But to sell to both parties is simply so absurd. If you want Israel to be saved, then you should not sell war material to Mohammedan countries. But that is not the question. Who cares about Israel and who cares about the Mohammedan countries? The real care is how many things you can sell. President Ronald Reagan vetoed it; he’s still going to sell.
The United States has a treaty with the European countries, NATO. Ronald Reagan has proposed to produce chemical war material, which is the ugliest. Only five countries out of sixteen have voted against it, but that does not matter because the majority is in favor. And all the great countries – England, France, Germany – are in favor.
When chemicals are used in war, it is more dangerous and more ugly – more inhuman. For example, a bomb will not be dropped here, but chemical gas will be released into the city and whoever breathes that gas will die immediately.
There are gases which will melt only your bones; you will live, but all your bones will be melted. So you will become just a bag without any bones. What kind of life will that man have when all his bones are gone? He cannot walk, he cannot sit; he can only lie down.
And they go on talking about truth, talking about God…and speaking lies.
Doctors from the West have now gone to Kiev and have found that Soviet Russia has given exact information about the disaster in their nuclear plant. Only two persons have died, and America managed to influence the whole world news media to say that two thousand people have died. There is a limit to exaggeration – two people became two thousand! And now Western experts have gone there and they have confirmed that only two persons have died. Four persons died afterwards, so in all, six persons have died.
And these are religious people trying in every way to deceive the world, to deceive the human mind, to pollute with ugly lies. So don’t be against men as such; just being against Christian atrocities is enough.
And don’t feel bad that something is wrong in you. It must be a remembrance. You can go through hypnosis so that you can remember better. That will help in both ways: you will not feel bad that you are having such bad, evil ideas, and secondly it will help you to make clear the distinction between men and Christians.
Now all European countries are Christian and they are ready for chemical war. And they will go on reading, “Love your enemies, Love your neighbor,” and they will continue praying in their churches…and they will prepare a chemical death for millions of people. And the initiator is a fundamentalist Christian.
Ronald Reagan has been brought up in a fundamentalist Christian school, and he has not grown up from there. He is still retarded.
You can see the Christian mind: Americans were asked, “If you want your brain to be changed, with whom would you want to change it?” God came last. Nobody cares about God; that’s how you can see.
If you directly ask somebody, then he will fight that God is the supreme being. But in an indirect way, they got caught. Ronald Reagan is ahead of God, ahead of Jesus Christ. Jesus Christ and God – these are just fictions, even to the Christian mind. Otherwise, in the poll God should have come first – he couldn’t even have come second – and Jesus Christ should have come second. And there are hundreds of beautiful people in the world; Ronald Reagan cannot have any place.
But for two thousand years Christianity has been killing people in the name of religion, in the name of God, in the name of Christ, in the name of the nation – so it is perfectly right to condemn them. But not every man is a Christian. To be a Christian is a degradation; it is becoming subhuman.
But it will be good to go through a hypnotic process to find out more clearly. Perhaps you may remember what were the techniques of the witches – how they functioned, how they managed to change people – because unless they were a danger to Christianity, Christianity would not have killed them.
It was a real danger, because Christianity has nothing to offer in comparison.

============================================================

Osho,
You are utter silence and so still, and yet I see, wherever you are, a mad cyclone surrounds you. Is this just your leela, or does existence always balance so perfectly?
It is neither. I have nothing to do with it. It is not my leela, my playfulness; nor is it nature balancing itself. It is something totally different from both.
The world is always a madhouse…at least up to now it has been a madhouse. But when everyone is mad, you don’t become aware of it.
If one person, just a single individual, comes out of madness – becomes sane – then suddenly the distinction is seen. Then you see sanity surrounded by madness, silence surrounded by a cyclone. If everybody else also becomes silent and the cyclone disappears, that will be a perfect balance by existence.
In our logical minds, balance happens between opposite things. In reality, balance means disappearance of the opposition, the two becoming one, their diametrically opposite ways merging into one, melting into one reality. That is balance, true balance.
I can understand your problem, that I am utterly silent; still, wherever I go, a great turmoil surrounds me.
The turmoil was there already; it is just that there was no way to contrast it. It is not that the turmoil suddenly appears. My silence is not creating it, but my silence is exposing it.
In many ways you can understand it. In a world where everybody is blind, to have eyes is dangerous because you are creating an opposition to the whole world. It is more convenient and comfortable to destroy your eyes and become blind, or at least keep your eyes closed and pretend to be blind.
But to make it known that you have eyes and you can see…and naturally, you would like everybody else also to be capable of seeing the beauty of existence, all the colors, all the stars. Without eyes a man is only twenty percent alive; eighty percent of experiences are through the eyes. Naturally you want to help. But if everybody is blind, they are not going to accept such an idea that they are blind. Their parents were such, their forefathers were such; for generations traditionally, this is the way they have been, and this is the only way to be.
And you are introducing something so new, so outrageous, so insulting to them, that rather than helping you to help them they would like to kill you, destroy you, so that any comparison, any contrast, which reminds them that perhaps they are blind, which creates a doubt in them: “Who knows, perhaps that man is right….”
They don’t want to get into such doubt. They don’t want to have any inconvenient ideas. Removing this man – crucifying him, poisoning him, murdering him – is far easier than for millions of people to accept a very inconvenient, uncomfortable, humiliating phenomenon: they are all blind.
The most difficult thing in the world is to accept that you are ignorant. Even the most ignorant person will not be ready to accept it. Only the greatest geniuses like Socrates have been able to accept that they know nothing.
The normal, the mediocre, the common people love to believe that they know, they know everything. And anybody who creates a question, creates a doubt, creates an air of skepticism, is dangerous because he is disturbing so many people’s comfortable lives of ignorance. He cannot be tolerated.
This is the greatest crime known to man.
So it is not my leela, not my game; nor is it nature trying to have a perfect balance – because the perfect balance will be absolute silence. There will be no opposition to it.
The situation is created because the society has lived in ignorance, believing it is knowledge. It has lived in all kinds of immoralities, believing they are moral. It has believed in all kinds of things, thinking that they are true; in reality, they are only fictions.
And anybody who tries to expose all these fictions and lies…he will be silent, because only a silent person can do that, only a person whose silence cannot be disturbed even by death. Then suddenly, all around him there is trouble of all kinds – lies, allegations – and every effort is made to prove that the majority of the world cannot be wrong.
It is a strange thing that truth is not democratic. What is true is not to be decided by votes; otherwise, we could never come to any truth ever. People would vote for what is comfortable – and lies are very comfortable because you don’t have to do anything about them, you just have to believe…. Truth needs great effort, discovery, risk, and to walk alone on a path which nobody has traveled before.
Just today, Anando was giving me some information. One piece was very significant: all schizophrenic people, neurotic people, psychotic people, or any other kind of mentally disturbed people, always want to be in the crowd – they don’t want to be alone. This was discovered by psychoanalysts who have been working with these mental cases for years – that these people have a great fear of being alone and that they are very comfortable in the crowd.
The reverse is also true – if you feel comfortable in the crowd, that means unconsciously you have a tendency to fall mentally sick if you go out of the crowd, if you are left alone.
In jails, the greatest punishment is the isolation cell. When a person is put into a dark isolation cell, just a piece of bread is slipped underneath the door; that is the only communication between himself and humanity. Nobody speaks to him, nobody comes to see him. And within three weeks he starts losing his sanity, he starts seeing things he has never seen – hallucinations, all kinds of illusions…the crowd was a protection.
Those psychoanalysts have not said what the basic reasons behind it are. The crowd is a protection because it supplies you with a common hallucination in which everyone believes. So you need not be worried about it, you need not think that this is something sick: “It is healthy to be a Christian, to be a Mohammedan, to be a Hindu, to go to the temple and to bow down before a stone statue and pray to a god who lives in heaven. Everybody is doing it, it must be true; so many people cannot be wrong….” It is a common hallucination.
Now, by putting a person into an isolation cell you have taken him out of the crowd, out of the comfort and the coziness of the crowd. He has never been on his own. Now, for the first time, in darkness, with nobody to talk to, with nobody to say anything to…his mind goes berserk. And now, to keep himself engaged, he has to do something, his mind has to do something.
One Russian scientist was kept in an isolation cell for years, but he kept himself sane by just counting figures. From one he would go counting up to millions and millions, and then he would count backwards, and then again…he was a great mathematician. And he was a chess player, so when he would get tired with figures, he would start playing chess with an imaginary partner. Just by playing chess and thinking of ways to win, he kept himself sane.
But the ordinary man within three weeks breaks down and starts having hallucinations. These are private hallucinations. That is the difficulty: they don’t have the sanction of the crowd. And that is why the jail authorities have thought keeping people in isolation the greatest punishment you can suffer. It is really the most terrible torture.
The crowd is living – it may be miserable, it may be suffering, but so is everybody else. If somebody wakes up and sees that everybody is asleep and having nightmares – unnecessarily suffering, creating illusions which have no counterpart in reality – that man will be looked upon as an enemy. He is the greatest friend, but he is bound to be looked upon as an enemy.
This is the whole history of man: all the friends have been looked upon as enemies, and all the enemies have been looked upon as friends.
I am carrying a silence around me. It is simply a by-product of my silence inside. And when I stand in the marketplace, naturally everybody feels disturbed, humiliated, contradicted – his beliefs are being destroyed; otherwise, what danger can I be?
I am a danger only because they are living in false beliefs. And I am doing my best to make it clear to them: whatever you believe is nonsense – and unless you drop it you cannot have any experience of blissfulness, you cannot become in touch with truth as it is.
I will go on doing it because I cannot think that there is not a possibility of humanity waking up – if not today, then tomorrow; if not by me, then by somebody else. But to lose hope means to drop all possibilities of future growth for human beings. So I will continue to do whatsoever I feel is right…and they will continue to avoid whatever they feel is dangerous.
Even if a few people are turned on, that’s enough – more than enough – because those few people will turn on a few more people. It can become a wildfire.
The turmoil, the disturbance, the ugliness all around has to be destroyed, and it cannot be destroyed by anybody who is using destructive means. It can be destroyed only by silence, by peace, by love, by compassion.

Osho,
Sitting in your presence is such a beautiful experience. We call it discourse. This word seems to me so poor next to what is happening here. Is there a word in any language that could point to, if not describe, what is happening between the master and the disciple?
There is no word in any language for what transpires between the master and the disciple. It is the strangest phenomenon in life. It is not a relationship, it is something far deeper, far greater, far more eternal. Once you have known the taste of being a disciple, the last problem for the master will be how to help you drop it – the idea of disciplehood – because it is so fulfilling, so perfect, that one doesn’t want to stop it.
It is said about Mahakashyap, one of Gautam Buddha’s disciples, that he never said anything. He was asked again and again by other disciples – because he was a great philosopher before he came to Gautam Buddha, and he had thousands of followers; he was one of the sharpest minds around Gautam Buddha, perhaps next only to Gautam Buddha – “Why don’t you speak? Why don’t you say anything?”
Because the disciples were persistently harassing him, he finally said, “The truth is that I don’t want to say anything because I don’t want to go beyond disciplehood. Saying anything, coming into the light, becoming important in Gautam Buddha’s eyes, is dangerous. I simply want to sit in a corner and just enjoy the presence of the master. I had come to seek truth, but now I do not have any desire for it. I had come here for enlightenment – I have dropped the idea. Just to be in the presence of this man – just to feel his love showering, his silence penetrating to the very core of my being – is so much, that to ask for more is simply ungratefulness.”
But these are the paradoxes of life: Mahakashyap was the first to become enlightened. His totality in being a disciple was enough to make him enlightened. And the only thing known about him in the Buddhist scriptures is that he laughed. That was the first time that he made any gesture.
Buddha looked at him and said, “Mahakashyap, you never speak – why are you laughing?”
He said, “It’s hilarious! I was trying to hide myself so that I wouldn’t come into the direct focus of you. And there are so many who are desirous of enlightenment, of truth, of the ultimate, that I thought, ‘Let all of them reach; I can wait. This waiting is so beautiful.’ But I had to laugh because I’m the first to have entered the world of enlightenment – and I never asked about it.”
Buddha said, “It is because you never asked about it. You in fact even dropped the desire for it. You were coming closer to it, you even became afraid that it might happen, so you were hiding in corners, you would never ask a question. And I knew that it was going to happen to you first – before anyone else – because these are the qualities that are needed. Unknowingly you fulfill all the conditions. And don’t be angry with me; I have nothing to do with it. You are solely responsible for what has happened.”
Mahakashyap said, “I have only one desire: though I have become enlightened – and it is a tremendous experience – please allow me, while you are alive, not to be sent anywhere else. Let me remain in your commune wherever you move.”
It was a moving, wandering commune – a few days here, a few days in another place. Buddha said, “I cannot say no to you; you have never asked anything.”
Mahakashyap remained his whole life with Gautam Buddha. When Gautam Buddha died, then he started speaking. Asked why, he said, “Now I have to create the same atmosphere for those who don’t have any taste of disciplehood. I had no intention of becoming a master, but destiny would not allow me not to. I wanted to die before Gautam Buddha so I wouldn’t have to carry this burden.” He proved to be one of the great masters – of the same caliber as Gautam Buddha – and he created a lineage of great disciples and great masters.
I have talked about Zen: Mahakashyap was the first – not Gautam Buddha – to initiate the process which culminated in Zen, because it was his disciple, Bodhidharma, who took the message to China. And perhaps Gautam Buddha would not agree with everything Zen consists of, because the real master of Zen and its origin is Mahakashyap, who has a totally different personality from Gautam Buddha – less serious, with a sense of humor, with no idea of holier-than-thou.
The man who was finally the decisive factor was Bodhidharma; he comes in the fifth generation of disciples of Mahakashyap. He was very decisive in giving a certain character to Zen, which it still carries.
Bodhidharma is farther away still from Mahakashyap. He has a great sense of humor, is very straightforward, knows no etiquette, no manners, is very simple and innocent, has no philosophical background, speaks in an ordinary way. But ordinary words from the mouth of a man like Bodhidharma start having such freshness, such authority – more than any philosophical jargon can ever have.
Philosophical words are vague, wishy-washy, big – much ado about nothing. Bodhidharma speaks exactly telegraphically; if ten words will do, he will not use eleven words.
But nobody would have conceived that this small stream arising in a silent man like Mahakashyap would become the world’s most purified and essential religiousness. But Mahakashyap has the quality of humbleness – so humble that he drops even the idea of enlightenment, of truth. Certainly, he has experienced something in the presence of his master: he is ready to forsake everything – truth included. If Gautam Buddha is going to hell, he would like to go to hell; he is not interested in going to heaven.
It is a strange phenomenon, that the West has no idea about. It knows students, it even knows the word disciple, but it has never gone very deep into the existential experience of it. The word disciple comes from the same root as discipline, and the root meaning of disciple is the capacity to hear.
Everybody hears, but not like the disciple. Everybody hears because everybody has ears. But the disciple hears not only with his ears but with his whole being, with his heart. While hearing, he is not thinking about it – whether it is true or not. That is the way of the student. The disciple simply drinks it, soaks it up, allows it to penetrate every fiber of his being.
The culmination of disciplehood is the devotee. When the disciple is perfect he enters into a new phase, which is that of the devotee. Now he feels no distinction from the master. Now there are two bodies but one soul. Now he even hears things which are not said, he understands things which are not indicated. He starts feeling the very vibration of the master’s being. The devotee is absolutely unknown to the West.
You are right: what is happening here is not of this world. It is in this world but not of this world. We are trying to bring the other world in – to smuggle it into this world.

Osho,
The magic keys you have given to go beyond duality are one thing to hear and another to live. Last night a miracle happened. I love to gamble, and walking through the door of a casino for me is like the people who have a snake bite on their tongue and have to stay aware. Last night I was able to remain present for the first time after hundreds of tries; and even though I lost money, the victory of not being identified couldn't be bought by all the money in the world.
Osho, I'm so happy.
I am also very happy.
It does not matter where awareness happens; what matters is that it happens. If it happens in a casino, then the casino has become a temple, a sacred place. For most people it does not happen, even in temples, in synagogues, in churches. For them, those places are not sacred because they have not tasted anything sacred there.
The place does not count, the act does not count. What counts is: can you do it absolutely unidentified? Let it happen in different situations and it will bring more and more flowers to your being.

Osho,
A curious thing happened to me once when I was a little girl – perhaps eleven or twelve years old. During recess time at school I was in the bathroom and I looked into the mirror to see if I looked tidy. Then suddenly I found that I was standing halfway between my body and the mirror, watching myself looking at my reflection in the mirror.
It amused me to see the three I's, and I thought it must have been a trick one could learn. So I tried to show my girlfriend and I tried it again myself – without success. It didn't, in retrospect, feel like witnessing; it felt like my essential self had stepped out of my physical form. Is it of any value to understand what happened to that little girl?
It happens to many children, but because the atmosphere around is not supportive of awareness, those experiences are not nourished by the parents, the school, the friends, the teachers. And if you say that it has happened to you, people will laugh – and you yourself will think that something has gone wrong, that it was not right.
For example, all children in every culture around the world like to whirl. And every parent stops them from whirling and says, “You will fall down.” It is true, there is a possibility they may fall down. But that falling down is not going to harm much.
But why do children like whirling? While the body is whirling, small children can see it whirling. They are no longer identified with it, because it is such a new experience.
With everything they are identified – with walking they are identified, with eating they are identified, with anything they are doing, usually they are identified. This whirling is such an experience that the faster the body moves, whirls, the less is the possibility of their remaining identified.
Soon they are lagging behind; the body is whirling but their being cannot whirl. It stops at a point and starts seeing its own body whirling. Sometimes it can come out of the body too. If the whirling child is not staying at one place but goes on moving – whirling and moving around the place – then his essential self can come out and watch it.
Such activities should be helped, nourished, and the child should be asked, “What are you experiencing?” and told, “This experience is one of the greatest in life, so don’t forget it. Even if you fall, there is no harm; there is not much that can be harmful. But what you can gain is invaluable.” But they are being stopped in this and in many other things.
My own experience in childhood was…the flooded river of my town – nobody used to cross it by swimming when it was flooded. It was a mountainous river. Ordinarily, it was a small river, but in rainy times it was at least one mile wide. The current of the water was tremendous; you could not stand in it. And the water was deep, so there was no way to stand anyway.
I loved it. I waited for the rainy season because it always helped…there would come a moment when I would feel that I was dying, because I was tired and I could not see the other shore, and the waves were high and the current was strong…and there was no way to go back, because now the other shore was as far away. Perhaps I was in the middle; it was the same either way. I would feel so completely tired and the water would take me down with such a force that there would come a time when I would see, “Now there is no possibility of living any more.” And that was the moment when I would suddenly see myself above the water and my body in the water. When it happened the first time, it was a very frightening experience. I thought I must have died. I had heard that when you die, the soul goes out of the body: “So I have gone out of the body and I am dead.” But I could see the body was still trying to reach the other shore, so I followed the body.
That was the first time I became aware of a connection between your essential being and the body. It is connected just below the navel – two inches below the navel – by something like a silver cord, a silver rope. It is not material, but it shines like silver. Each time I reached the other shore, the moment I reached the other shore my being would enter into the body. The first time it was frightening; then it became a great entertainment.
When I told my parents, they said, “Someday you are going to die in that river. This is enough of a sign. Stop going into the river when it is flooded.”
But I said, “I am enjoying it so much…the freedom, no force of gravitation, and seeing one’s own body completely away.”
Then I moved to the university and there it happened once. I have talked about it. Just behind the university campus there was a hillock with three trees. I used to love those trees because it was impossible to sit silently in the hostels. So I used to go and climb up a tree. The middle tree was very comfortable to sit in – the way its branches were – and I would sit there for hours in silence.
One day – I don’t know what happened – when I opened my eyes I saw my body lying down on the ground. It was the same experience that had happened in the river many times, so there was no fear.
But in the river, it used to happen automatically that when the body reached the shore, my being would enter into the body. I had no idea how to enter the body; it had always happened of its own accord. So I was stuck. I had no idea. I could see the cord joining me to the body, but how to enter the body, from where to enter? I had never learned any technique from anybody. I simply waited. There was nothing to do.
A woman who used to bring milk to sell to the hostel students came by, and she saw my body lying down. She was puzzled. She just touched my head to see whether I was alive or dead, and the moment she touched my head I entered into my body with such a quick force that I still can not get the idea of how it happens.
But one thing became certain: if a man’s being is out, a woman’s touch to the body will help him to come into the body. And vice versa: if a woman’s body is away from her being, then a man’s touch – and particularly on the forehead where the third eye is…. It was just by accident that she touched me on my head to see whether I was alive or dead, to see what had happened. She had no idea that I was sitting in the tree seeing everything that she was doing. When I opened my eyes she was shocked.
She said, “What are you doing here?”
I said, “I was going to ask you what you are doing here touching my head.”
She said, “I was thinking perhaps some accident had happened or something. You looked almost dead.”
I said, “I was almost dead, and I am grateful to you that you helped me. It was because of your touch that I came into the body.”
She said, “You mean you were sitting in the tree?”
She got so frightened of me. She used to give me milk. She stopped coming to my barrack. She simply said, “I don’t want to face that person. He is dangerous. What he was doing I don’t know, but he was doing something dangerous.”
I had to catch hold of her and tell her, “You need not be worried. I was not doing anything. I was just meditating and the body fell. You helped me, and I am grateful. And there is nobody who brings such good milk as you, so you cannot stop doing it. If you stop doing it, I will start sitting in the same tree where you have to pass, coming and going – remember! And my body will be lying down, and I will be sitting in the tree.”
She said, “Don’t do it again. I will give you milk – pure milk without water – but don’t do it again, at least not while I am passing by, because that hill is empty…there is nobody there, and I have to pass by it to go to my village.” The village was beyond the hill.
So I said, “Remember, if you stop coming and delivering milk, then I am going to do the trick there. I can even come to your village; just in front of your house I can do it.”
She said, “I am a poor woman. Don’t create any trouble for me.”
What happened to you was just accidental. If you had pursued it, it would have come back.
In fact, to watch in the mirror is one of the methods prescribed by the Tantra system – but to watch long enough so that you become so identified with the reflection in the mirror, that when you step back, your body remains in the old position. And for women, it is more possible, because nobody wastes as much time in front of the mirror.
Mulla Nasruddin was killing flies, and his wife said, “Now it is enough. For one hour you have been killing them. How many have you killed?”
He said, “Only two: one male, one female.”
His wife said, “How did you manage to find out which one was male and which one was female?”
He said, “One was sitting on the mirror for the whole hour; no male can do that. The male was also sitting there once in a while; but the female remained stuck on the mirror.”
But it is a method prescribed in the scriptures, that you watch in the mirror long enough so that you become identified with the reflection in the mirror. Then you step back. Your body will not step back, but your being will step back. Then you can see three bodies.
By the way, if you go on looking into the mirror every day for a particular period of time, one hour every day just looking into your own eyes, in a few days, a few weeks – it depends on each individual – one day you will suddenly see that the mirror is empty. You are standing before it, but the mirror is empty. That, too, is a great experience. When it happens you will feel tremendous silence and a peace you have never known – as if you have gone beyond all reflections and you have come back to the real.
But it was good…it happens to many children. Many people have reported it to me, but nobody persists. So once in a while it happens, and then one forgets it, or one thinks perhaps one imagined it, perhaps it was something, just a fancy, a dream. But it is a reality. You had walked out of yourself, and what you saw is a kind of awareness outside the body.
The same awareness you have to practice from inside the body. They are not different in quality. And the easiest way to find this out-of-body experience is to lie down on a bed, flat on your back. Relax, and when you feel completely relaxed, then just start feeling that you are leaving the body, floating upwards toward the ceiling. In a few days you will be able to float above the body. But make sure that nobody disturbs you while you are in such a position, because if somebody disturbs you and the cord is broken, you are dead.
So the best suggestion: ask Kaveesha to be present to help you to relax and suggest to you that your soul is leaving the body and floating in the air. And you will see, from the air, Kaveesha sitting in the room and that you are lying flat on the bed.
Just keep a very dim light with candles, and burn incense. But anything that you do – burning incense, candles – then the same thing should be repeated always so that it becomes associated. So you need not be dependent on Kaveesha forever.
After two or three sessions, just when you light the incense and the candle and you lie down, immediately you will be able to float out. But keep alert that nobody disturbs you, that nobody comes into the room and wakes you suddenly. That can be fatal. If the cord is broken, then there is no way to rejoin it.
So, first try it with Kaveesha. She can give you post-hypnotic suggestions that you will be able to float out of the body without any disturbance. And tell somebody to wait at the door so that nobody comes in for one hour and you are left alone.
When you give the suggestion that your body will be left by the soul for fifteen minutes or thirty minutes, exactly after thirty minutes it will automatically come back to the body.
Never forget that – because entering into the body is difficult. And if it happens sometimes…then anybody who is watching the door has to remember: if it is a woman, then a man should touch the third eye, or if it is a man, then a woman should touch the third eye. And the soul will simply rush back to the body. Those opposite energies are needed to attract each other.

============================================================

Osho,
Whenever you talk about music and dance, it touches something really deep in me, and my whole being is absorbed in every word and gesture, like a sponge. When you talked about awareness and being totally lost in the music, I suddenly understood what an incredible gift you have given me by letting me dance around you – where nothing was said, but awareness had to be there, and it came naturally, together with being lost in the dance. In moments like that I am filled with awe and gratefulness, just seeing how you guide us so perfectly and so caringly and how you create situations through which, with just a little bit of effort, we can gain so much.
I am so immensely grateful to be here with you.
Gayan, the most important thing in spiritual guidance is that it should not be direct. The guided should not feel he is being guided. Whenever guidance is direct it brings a kind of slavery; the guided becomes dependent on the guide.
But to guide indirectly is very difficult. It is a kind of persuasion where the guided cannot feel at all that he is being told to do this, to do that. He is simply being given indications, with such love, that he likes to go in those directions in those moments. And he becomes aware that he has been guided on each step – carefully guided – but only when he has reached.
Now there is no problem and no fear. One who has arrived cannot be made dependent, he can only feel gratitude. The responses will be totally different.
If you guide a person directly he will resist it, because you are trying to mold his personality; you are taking away his freedom, making him move in a certain direction.
In the first place he will never reach, because with this reluctance, this resistance, there is, deep down, anger and rage. He is doing it – becoming dependent, accepting a certain spiritual slavery – for his own desires.
And these are the factors which will create resentment in him. They will not bridge him to the master; they will create a wall between the two. Reaching the goal is almost impossible.
This is a vicious circle: when you do everything that you are being told to do, outwardly you are obedient, ready to serve the master – outwardly grateful – but inwardly reluctant, resistant, angry. And when doing everything that the master has said, and you don’t reach…that is the point where these kinds of people turn into enemies. Rather than bringing gratitude into them, the whole process has only gathered more and more enmity.
But to guide a person without his being at all aware that he is being guided…it is just like when you smell perfume in the garden and you start moving towards it. You will not feel reluctant, resistant, inimical to the perfume – although it has guided you. In fact, spreading the perfume is nothing but spreading a net in which those who are capable will be caught and brought closer and closer.
They will recognize only after they have reached that they have been guided, that they have been guarded, cared for – and not a single word has been told to them to do this or not to do this. Their freedom has not been touched in any way. They have not been turned into slaves.
This has been my experience: it is very rare to find a master who can guide you in such a way, because it is with each step difficult, arduous. And the master has to be very conscious, very cautious that the disciple does not feel in any way lower than him. He has to take his hand in his own hand in such a way as if the disciple himself is taking the master’s hand in his own hand. It is a tremendous art. He allures, he does not dictate.
So amongst masters you will find very rare masters who are perfect guides. And this is the definition of the perfect guide: he does not allow you to know that you are being guided. You come to realize it only at the very end of the journey – and suddenly there is great gratitude, gratitude for all the arduous roundabout ways the master has had to use just not to hurt you in any way, not to create any dependence. On the contrary, making you more and more free, he has functioned only as a friend.
But not all the disciples are capable of being guided in this way. I have been asked hundreds of times why women are attracted so much to my philosophy, my way of life. I have given some answers, but the real answer is: the woman is a more efficient disciple than the man, and she knows the delicacy of being guided without direct instructions. She does not function through the mind, which needs a direct, clear-cut catechism.
“Just tell me the Ten Commandments” – that is the language of man. But there are men also who have the same feeling heart as the women. They can become perfect disciples, but the percentage will be less than that of women.
And amongst the men, those who don’t have a heart, who function through the mind, many may come close to the master – intellectually interested according to their prejudices – and may seem to have understood him well, better than anybody else…their intellectual understanding will be more clear.
The land of the heart is not the land of arithmetic or logic; it is poetry, it is music. You can enjoy it, but you cannot understand it.
I am reminded of one great English poet, Coleridge. Although he never completed more than seven poems in his whole life, he still became one of the greatest poets of the English language – because it is not the quantity that counts, it is the quality. When he died he left almost forty thousand incomplete poems.
His whole life, his friends were harassing him continuously: “You seem to be mad! You have such a treasure. Just a few poems have made you a great poet; if you could produce forty thousand poems of that quality, perhaps in the whole world there would be no competition against you – in the whole history of man, past, present and future. Why do you go on piling up incomplete poems?”
He said, “You don’t understand; I cannot do it. Unless existence guides me so politely that I don’t feel the guidance, that I don’t feel the push and pull to do it, I am not going to do it. These poems are the poems of my freedom – existence becoming free through me. These poems will have to wait.”
Sometimes a poem was just missing one line, and his poet friends said, “You can compose that line yourself.”
He said, “It does not work that way. I have tried, but the quality is as distant as the sky is from the earth. I can deceive others, but I cannot deceive myself. I will wait; when existence comes – without forcing me, because I cannot do it under force – and it simply persuades me, encourages me, and I know only afterwards that I have been guided, then only will I complete a poem.”
Once it happened in the London University…the professor who was teaching literature came across a line of Coleridge which he could not make any sense of. And he was a sincere man; he said to his students, “I cannot give any reasonable explanation for it. And I don’t want to deceive you. Coleridge lives just in my neighborhood; he is old, but being his neighbor, I am still allowed to see him and meet him. I will go to him and ask him myself what the meaning of this line is.”
He went to Coleridge the next day and asked him. Coleridge looked at the whole poem and he said, “There is meaning in it. When I wrote it two persons knew the meaning. Now only one knows.”
Hearing him say that only two persons knew the meaning, the professor became afraid: where was he going to find those two persons? And when Coleridge said, “Now, only one knows,” then the professor became even more afraid. There was only one hope; he said, “But that one must be you?”
Coleridge said, “No. When I wrote this I knew it, God knew it. Now, only God knows; I don’t know. It is a beautiful line; alas, I have no way of remembering. In fact, I have not written it.”
His name for existence is God, that’s all – there is no difference. He is saying, “I have not written it. The writing was done by me, but a bigger, vaster energy was persuading me, encouraging me to write it down. I was used as an instrument, a medium.”
This word medium reminds me of what Gayan is saying, that dancing, singing around me, she had become completely lost in the dancing, in the singing, and she had no idea at all that she was being guided. I have never mentioned any guidance; I had left it to her. The way she wants to dance, she can dance. But I was there.
She was dancing around me, so she could not remain out of my presence. And my presence was persuading her to go further and further, deeper and deeper. Unsaid, unheard…but the guidance was there. Now she remembers, retrospectively, the tremendous experience she has gone through, which has changed her forever. She cannot fall back; she can go ahead, but not backwards.
In the beginning she must have thought that it was just simply decorative: “In a darshan, dancing must be just decorative.” But slowly, slowly she got into it. If I had said that there are guidelines to be followed, she would not have been able to be totally in it; those guidelines would have been a disturbance.
Whether man or woman, the way of truth is the way of the heart. And the way of the heart cannot be taught, it can only be inspired, thrilled, excited, to go on a new exploration…invited, but not ordered.
She has brought a beautiful question which will help many. The words order and guidance and commandments – they are all mind words. The heart has no parallel words; it knows only inspiration, becoming aflame, not knowing why…but it is so juicy, of such a grand beauty that the heart goes on following it.
But many of the religions have destroyed the way of the heart because there were not many masters who could manage it. It is a fine art, superfine. It was easy to manage teachers, teachings, guidance, discipline for the mind – but the mind has nothing at all to do with religion.
Once, I was coming home from the river, and there was a boy who must have been an idiot; he was trying to pull a cow back towards home. The cow must have gone to the river and was not willing to go back home – and she was much more powerful than the boy. And he was trying hard.
I stood there and watched. Instead of the boy pulling the cow, the cow was pulling the boy towards the river. And he was shouting and asking people to help: “This cow is going mad!”
I said, “Nobody is going mad; it is simply that you don’t know how to bring a cow home.”
He said, “How do you bring a cow home?”
I said, “Drop this rope, and instead of the rope, take some green grass in your hands, move ahead of the cow, and the cow will follow. That is persuasion; you are not forcing. The cow is free; she can go to the river or anywhere she wants…but with this green grass in front of her, she cannot go anywhere.”
Guidance is exactly like that. You have to inspire, not instigate. You have to be very polite and humble, not even giving a hint that the other person is being ordered to do something. You have to be inviting, requesting, and let the person come into the field of energy where things start taking place on their own.
With men the problem is that many cannot manage the language of the heart. Sooner or later they fall out. And when they fall out, then a trouble is there. People start asking them, “Why have you left?” And the mind never wants to say, “I don’t know.” The mind may have to create lies, allegations to justify itself: “I had to leave because that was not the right place.”
The reality is you were not in the right shape. You tried to manage the work that can be done only by the heart by something else – by the mind. You failed. In the beginning you will succeed, but soon there will come a point where you will have to turn towards the heart, because the mind can go on, round and round, but it never reaches to the center.
And those who are very deeply grounded in the intellect cannot leave it; it is their investment, their whole lifelong investment. So rather than coming to growth, to gratitude, they fall out – empty, angry, ungrateful, saying things which if they had even thought twice, they would not have said. And all that they are saying really goes against them, because what were you doing for ten years with this man? It took you ten years to find out that this is the wrong place? Then, even in ten lives you are not going to find the right place. You are simply retarded.
To have a soft heart, in a man or a woman, is of immense value in the growth of, the evolution of, your consciousness.

Osho,
I recall a beautiful story of Hermann Hesse. A woman is pregnant and an old wise man tells her that she may have one wish granted in respect to her child. She wishes that her child be loved by all. This wish is fulfilled, and although the young boy is bad, he is loved by everyone. By the time he has become a young man, he has everything around him that he ever wants. But he is so unhappy that he wants to commit suicide. However, the old wise man reappears and indicates that he can have one wish.
The young man wishes to be able to love everyone rather than be loved by everyone. His wish is fulfilled. His beautiful face becomes old and ugly, and the whole town turns against him. He is stoned and can find no food or clothes. But he is overflowing with love, and every small thing in life becomes a love affair.
He decides to go on a pilgrimage, and one cold night he encounters the same old wise man, who receives him with tremendous love. The pilgrim relaxes into the old sage and becomes an innocent child again.
Osho, would you please comment?
Hermann Hesse is one of the Western minds who has come very close to the Eastern way of looking at things. Perhaps there is no other man of his quality who understands the East better. This story is an indication of his understanding of the Eastern wisdom about love.
The first wish the mother asks is that her child should be loved by all. Looking at the words you will not understand what is hidden behind them. He becomes a young man, he has everything, he is beautiful. Although he is not well-mannered, he is spoilt because everybody loves him unconditionally. But he is not satisfied. As he goes on becoming more mature, the situation comes to a point where he wants to commit suicide.
This is the whole history of all those who want to be loved. Why is he in so much despair? He should be happy. What more can you ask? – everybody loves you, in spite of you. But to the perceiving eye there is something: when you are loved by everybody you become an object of love. You lose your individuality, you lose your integrity, you lose your subjectivity. You become an object. Everybody loves you like a beautiful piece of art – and nobody wants to become an object.
That’s what his mother forgot. That’s what millions of people in the world have forgotten. The wish looks perfectly good, but its implications are very dangerous. First, it reduces you from the high status of a subjective consciousness into an objective reality. Everybody loves you without bothering whether you are worthy of it or not. And you are not worthy of it; it is because of the blessing of the old wise man that they are loving you. Their love has spoiled you; you are not of any worth. You understand it, that you are not worthy, but still people are loving you. A great guilt arises in you that something has gone wrong.
Love has to be earned. Unearned love is just like a beggar – without earning anything, spreading his begging bowl before you. Man wants everything to be earned; he wants to be worthy of it. He should not be just a beggar. He is reduced to an object, he is reduced to a beggar. And the boy had no love for anybody, because that was not part of the wish. So you can see: he cannot understand love either.
The fire should be burning on both sides simultaneously.
He has no fire; he is utterly cold, ice-cold. He has never loved anybody. And you can understand the misery of a person who has never loved – because he does not know what love is. According to the blessing everybody is loving him, but according to his understanding, nobody has loved him because he does not know the feel of love. He has never loved anybody – how can he know it?
So all that love surrounding him is just meaningless. As far as he is concerned nobody has loved him. And he is not aware of the wish of his old mother, of the blessing of the old sage. And even if he had been aware, it would not have made any difference.
To understand love, first you should be loving.
Only then can you understand love.
Millions of people are suffering: they want to be loved, but they don’t know how to love. And love cannot exist as a monologue; it is a dialogue, a very harmonious dialogue.
So much love being showered on the man, and still he decides to commit suicide…because it is not what people give to you that satisfies, it is what you give to people that satisfies. It is not by being a beggar that you can be contented, it is by being an emperor, and love makes you an emperor when you give. And you can give so much, inexhaustibly, that the more you give, the more refined, the more cultured, the more perfumed your love becomes – the more there is contentment.
But that poor fellow was in a difficult situation. Everybody was loving him and he did not know what love is. Just fed up with this love he decides to commit suicide. The old sage appears again because the sage knew that that was going to be. The mother had asked something – according to her a great wish but not according to the sage. He knew this wish would lead to suicide. He says, “I can give you one wish.” And you can see immediately what the boy asks for, because that is what he is lacking.
The story is tremendously methodological. On the surface you may not understand it, but underneath everything is so well-connected. The second wish proves what I have been telling you. He asks that he does not want others to love him, he wants to love others. In that, he is showing that the first wish is meaningless without this second wish. He wants to love everyone.
But the story here may seem strange to you, that as the wish is granted, the young and beautiful man changes into an ugly and old man. It indicates that it is only in old age that people come to understand what they missed in their life: they never loved. In their whole life they wanted others to love them, and were miserable. They always wanted to get more and more love; they were greedy.
At the end, when people start forgetting them because they have become old and ugly, they have a look at their whole life, at what was missing; and the revelation – they never gave, they only wanted. Ordinarily, it is too late. Now, even to find people to receive love from them will not be possible.
And you have in all languages, “the dirty old man” – in all languages the same expression – because in old age, when he is no longer young and no longer beautiful and everything has turned ugly and he is ready to die, the understanding arises that he missed one thing. That’s why his whole life has been empty and meaningless; he never loved, he never gave. So now he wants to love people. But who wants to love an old and ugly man? He is disgusting. His love looks like lust – not love but the lust of a dying man.
So the story is significant in that as the young man receives the blessing of the old sage, suddenly he becomes old and ugly. He is granted the wish to love. The whole story is about humanity: now he can love, but nobody will receive his love; now he can give, but everybody will be escaping from him. He will be disgusting. Talking about love is a faraway thing; nobody wants even to sit with him. He is half dead and he wants to love you. And naturally he will want to love the young, the beautiful, and obviously he will be denied.
He has moved from one extreme of the pendulum to the other extreme of the pendulum; either by itself is only half, and no extreme can be fulfilling. Seeing the situation that neither was he satisfied when people were showering their love on him, nor was he satisfied by loving people – because now it is difficult to find people to love – he goes on a pilgrimage, and for the last time he meets the sage.
The sage knew, because this is the dialectic: the mother had chosen one part, which proved wrong; he had chosen the other part, which is going to prove wrong. Both together they can prove right, but not separately.
But now, seeing that both have failed, he has come to a kind of transcendence and sees that all dualities fail. And when he meets the old man, the old man hugs him and he becomes just like an innocent child – exactly the same child that the mother had brought to the old sage to be blessed. Life has done a whole circle; he is back again as a small child.
That too is very significant, because each of life’s failures brings you a little understanding, a little transcendence. It is that little understanding and that little transcendence of dualities that gives you a new birth after death – again as an innocent child; again, an opportunity not to fall into the same old trap. But people go on falling into the same old trap again and again; it becomes habitual.
The innocence of childhood will come after each failure of the extreme – after the failure of both extremes. But you may start again the whole game….
In the East they are right in saying that circles of life go on moving in the same rut with the same failures, into the same ditches with the same miseries – and nobody seems to learn anything. If somebody really learns, and the transcendence beyond duality is no longer the blessing of a saint but your very understanding – it arises out of your own being – then there is no longer any need for a new birth.
This is what I call enlightenment – the understanding that all extremes fail. Remain in the middle, exactly in the middle, where the pendulum stops and the clock stops, where time stops – no movement, no desire, no goal, nowhere to go, but just to be here now.
Now that this innocence is arising out of you, this presence is born out of you, you will not need another birth. Your education in the world is finished. Now you can be accepted in the wider existence, with all the awakened ones.
The story is certainly very beautiful; try to go deeper into its implications. And there are thousands of stories like this, which people simply read like stories. Almost always they are in the books of children, who cannot understand anything; they simply read the story.
These stories are needed to be read by those who are meditating, who are no longer childish, who have a certain maturity, so that they can open the hidden meaning of the story.
Wherever you find such stories, you can bring them to me. They contain the wisdom of the ages.

Osho,
I expect I must have changed over the twelve years I have been with you, but I would find it very difficult to describe to anyone just exactly how and in what respect I have. Yet I can see that others around you have changed. I can also recall and trace through it changing aspects of my relationship as a disciple to you as my master. In fact, that seems to have been the whole pivot for me for any change that has come about. My connection with you has been like a lamp, a gauge, a compass.
Is it important to have an idea of what changes have happened to oneself?
No. If the right changes are happening, then the answer is no. If you are feeling good, if you are feeling that you are in a symphony, then the answer is no. But if things are going wrong – changes are happening, but you are becoming worse – then yes, you have to think about them.
Remember, thinking is needed only when things are going worse. When things are going towards higher states of being, thinking is a disturbance.
It is almost like this: if you are healthy you don’t ask if you should go to the doctor to be examined because you are feeling too healthy, too much in a well-being. The answer would be no. But if you are feeling sick, the answer would be, “Yes, go to the doctor.”
So my answer depends on your feeling. If you are feeling that you are growing, becoming more silent, more peaceful, more loving, more compassionate, gaining higher values, reaching towards the stars, then there is no need to think about what changes are happening and why they are happening, because all that thinking will be a disturbance – it will stop the growth. Then, just forget about thinking; put your whole and total energy into growing.
But if you feel that something is going wrong – you are more tense, more in anguish, more in misery, more in despair – then certainly you should think about what the reason is, why you are falling back rather than growing up.

Osho,
Shakespeare wrote, as part of the dialogue describing two characters in two of his plays, the following phrases which have come to me so often in the years I have known you, in reference to you.
Of one, he wrote: “He bestrides the narrow world like a colossus. He is man of men.”
And of the other: “Age cannot wither, nor custom stale…A man of infinite variety.”
Osho, our words are so inadequate, and yet the desire is so strong to express something of what it means to us. In you, all that is fine and pure and of the noblest heights has taken form.
In your disciples, the nameless silence has taken root and will find a voice and be living proof of who you are.
There is no need…. I can understand the desire to describe your feelings. You have devoted your whole life to me; you have given yourself to me totally. Naturally, the desire is bound to arise to describe what kind of man you have come across.
All words will look inadequate.
But there is no need at all – because I can see in your eyes, I can see in your tears, I can see in your laughter, I can see in your silence all that you want to say…and that you cannot say it.

============================================================

Osho,
In the Japanese language, the word for love is a picture of a person with a full stomach, kneeling, with both hands raised in offering. The picture means, “I am so full; please allow me to share, please take from me.” Osho, is it possible that the languages of cultures that use symbols are more protected from depreciation in value, as happens for example in English with the word love?
The languages like Japanese or Chinese are certainly more protective of the essential quality of a word. But these languages are pictorial languages.
The pictorial language is the language of the unconscious mind. That’s why in the unconscious mind you see dreams.
The pictorial languages are also the languages of the child, who can only think in pictures, not by the alphabet. That’s why in children’s books you will see bigger, more colorful pictures. And as the child grows, pictures start becoming smaller, and finally the pictures disappear; only abstractions, alphabetical letters, take their place.
The alphabetical languages have some qualities; that’s why they have won the race against the nonalphabetical languages. They are simple to learn.
Some languages have twenty-six letters; all words will be made out of these twenty-six letters. Sanskrit has the biggest number – fifty-two letters. More are not possible, because you cannot make more sounds than fifty-two. So while in English many sounds are missing which are in existence – there is only one s and in Sanskrit there are three – Sanskrit is as perfect a language as it can be.
But Sanskrit also got defeated in the race of languages. It was very poetic like Arabic and other old languages, but you cannot do science in poetry, you cannot do mathematics in poetry. You need a more prose-like style of language. Poetry may be closer to emotions and subjectivity; prose is closer to facts and the objective world. And we are dealing with the objective world. Very few people are dealing with the subjective.
So languages that were leaning more towards the subjective, towards the poetic, got defeated, and languages that were pictorial were very difficult. Unless you are born Chinese or Japanese, it will take almost half of your life to learn the language. That is too much – thirty years – because you will have to remember so many pictures of all things…so many symbols. So although those languages have the innocence of child, a purity….
And they are not so corruptible, because for each different shade of meaning, they have different symbols. For example, love – people love all kinds of things. People love their cars, people love their clothes, people love their food, people love their houses, people love their wives, their friends, their husbands – one word has to be used for so many different things. It naturally loses its purity.
A thing cannot be loved in the same way that you love a person. And if you love both in the same way you don’t know what love is. Love should be a definite quality. But the language does not offer many words – only one word for everything. It is simpler, less complicated, more utilitarian, but you cannot save the purity of the word.
This Japanese symbol for love – a man with a big belly, offering with both his hands – can only be interpreted in one way; there are not two ways. It is simply saying that you are so full that you want to share. And that is the purity of love, when there is no desire to get but to give. And you can give only when you are overflowing, you can share only when you have too much – out of abundance.
The picture makes it definite. But then you will have to learn millions of symbols for every small thing in the world. And it is too tedious, too tiresome; for each small thing you have to make a symbol. In Chinese, the symbol for fight or war is one roof, and under one roof, two women. It shows that if you have two wives, there is going to be a constant fight. So for all fights, this is the symbol.
In a way it is very solid. It has its own beauty and gives a definite meaning which cannot be easily corrupted; hence, you will not find in Chinese or Japanese any commentaries on scriptures. A commentary means you have to interpret.
In Sanskrit you will find thousands of commentaries on a single scripture, because Sanskrit is a subjective and emotional and poetic language, immensely capable of expressing any nuance of feelings, sentiment – the whole spectrum. It has tried to be perfect, and it has almost attained perfection. But in attaining perfection it has lost something of humanness.
Each word has many meanings – a dozen meanings – because it has taken all sounds as letters. Now it wants no meaning in life or existence to be left without a name. Even with fifty-two letters you cannot exhaust the whole existence, so each word has a dozen meanings. It gives a very flexible beauty to it, because poets can play with words more easily when there are so many meanings. But it creates a new phenomenon: the commentary.
Krishna has spoken in the Shrimad Bhagavadgita, and there are thousands of commentaries. The same line can be interpreted in a thousand ways. Now it has become a jungle of commentaries; you don’t know what Krishna really wanted to say.
It became such a phenomenon – it has not happened anywhere else in the world – that Shankara will write a commentary on Krishna, then Shankara’s commentary itself becomes a question – what does he mean? Then Shankara’s disciples start writing commentaries on his commentary, and so on and so forth, generation after generation.
Krishna’s Gita is left far away. You will not find even the echo of it, because from one commentary to another commentary, they are changing their focus. The person who writes a commentary on Shankara is not concerned with Krishna, he is concerned with Shankara – with giving a definite meaning to Shankara. And there are other disciples trying to do the same – to compete with each other – so there are hundreds of commentaries on Shankara. Then these people, on their own, will produce disciples who will be writing commentaries on their commentaries.
To go into Indian scriptures is really to enter into a wonderland. How people can go on playing with words, finding new meanings contradictory to each other! And there is no way to say who is right, because the language allows all the meanings.
Because of this flexibility Sanskrit cannot be a scientific language, although it has beauty. To chant it is almost like singing. It has flexibility, not monopoly. Everybody is free to manage the meaning, to derive a philosophy from it, which nobody else has ever tried to do before. So there is a freedom of thought, but there is bound to be confusion. Science cannot afford that.
The pictorial languages like Japanese are very systematic. They have a single-pointed meaning. No commentary is needed, the meaning is in the symbol. But you need so many symbols that such a big language cannot be used for the whole world as an international language, because if you are not born with it from childhood, it is going to take half of your life just to learn the language; the question of using it does not arise. Life is so short, people are in a hurry, death is so close, that it will be a sheer wastage of time – thirty years or more just to memorize symbols.
All the languages of the world have something significant in them, but they also have problems.
Geeta’s question is significant. It is true – in English or in any language which uses an alphabet, no word can remain pure, because it will have to be used for many things. In different contexts it will get polluted, contaminated – and people don’t even recognize it. Somebody says, “I love you” in the same way that he says, “I love smoking.” He does not see that loving to smoke and loving a person cannot be put in the same category; they can’t have the same meaning. English is poor in that way.
In Sanskrit, if a brother and sister love each other, there is one word for it that excludes a sexual relationship automatically without saying anything. It is love, but not of the kind that exists between husband and wife. So for the husband and wife there is a different word. For your parents there is a different word, because the same words cannot be used. When you are using it for your parents, there must be something of gratitude in it, something of respect, reverence. And when you are using it for a thing, again, it cannot be from any other category; it will have its own category. It will be more like liking, not loving.
But then there are so many words that it becomes unmanageable, and with slight changes their meanings change. And every language has developed with a different background.
I have been thinking that there must be a language which can have all the beautiful qualities of all the languages without their problems, but it seems impossible. There have been efforts like Esperanto, but they don’t take root; they are artificial, man-made.
It would be a great thing if the whole world had one language. It would help immensely to bring humanity closer to each other. It would be one of the greatest steps against war – a basic groundwork for understanding – because most of the conflicts are of misunderstanding, and language plays a great role in understanding or misunderstanding.
So there have been people who have tried to create an artificial language accepted by the whole world, but no effort has succeeded for the simple reason that the language you have learned since you were born has gone so deeply into your bones, into your blood, into your marrow, that it is almost a part of you. Something can be transplanted over it, but it will not be a joy. And why should one carry a burden?
The mother language goes so deeply into your being…. One of my professors, S.K. Saxena, who lived almost all his life in the West studying, then lecturing, being a professor, came back to India only in his old age. But he confessed to me, “It is strange, but I have to confess to you that I have lived almost all my life in the West, but still, if I fall in love with a woman, I want to talk in my mother tongue. To talk with her in a language which is not my mother tongue seems to be superficial.”
Or in fighting you will forget the transplanted language. You would like to fight in your mother tongue.
There is a famous incident in the life of the famous emperor, Bhoj. He was well-known for respecting all kinds of talented people. His court was full of talented people. From all over the country, he had picked up the best – the cream – in every direction, in every dimension. He had the best scholars, the best philosophers, the best singers, the best poets.
One day a man appeared, and he challenged Bhoj: “You are too proud of your so-called scholars. I challenge your scholars to recognize my mother tongue. I speak thirty languages; I will speak in those thirty languages, and if anybody can recognize which one is my mother tongue, then there are one hundred thousand gold pieces for him. If he loses then he has to pay me the same amount – and all are challenged.”
The first day he spoke a few passages in one language, then in another, then in another. A few people tried and they lost. Just one man, a poet, Kalidas – he is the Shakespeare of India – remained silent, for the simple reason that the challenge was for the scholars, not for the poets. But he was watching the man very carefully. But after thirty languages – and at least fifteen persons had already lost – even Kalidas could not manage to find even a small way to distinguish which one was his mother tongue.
When all the scholars were finished – nobody else was ready to take the challenge, seeing the fate of the fifteen most prominent scholars of the court – Kalidas appealed to the man, “I could not participate today because you did not invite the poets. You invited only the scholars. It would be a great kindness if you can come tomorrow again and give a chance to the poets.”
The man was more than happy. He said, “I can go on continuing as long as you want. Poets, singers, musicians, dancers, theologians, philosophers…anybody. I can go on coming every day.”
The next day Kalidas was standing in front of the gate with the whole court and the emperor. He asked them to stand there to receive and welcome the guest. They said, “This is not necessary,” but he said, “This is part of my strategy – you just stand here.”
There were at least a hundred marble steps leading to the palace, and as the man reached the upper step, Kalidas pushed him. He slipped on the steps, rolled down, and started shouting. Kalidas said, “This is your mother language!” – and the man had to accept that this was his mother language.
“But,” the man said, “this is not right.”
Kalidas said, “There was no other way – either love or fight. It is something that cannot be managed superficially.”
I told the story to Dr. S.K. Saxena. He said, “The story is perfectly true; it is my experience. I have loved many women, but it was always superficial because I could not speak my mother tongue. I could not say how much I loved her. And to say it in a foreign language was simply a translation; it was not the original.”
In the world there are thousands of languages, and nobody is willing to drop his own language. The only way seems to be that everybody be allowed to have two languages.
One is the international language – and English is perfectly right for it. It is more contemporary than any other language. Every year eighteen hundred words are added to it. No other language has that. It goes on renewing itself continually with the times. It seems right now to be the only language which is still growing, and the future needs a continually growing language, growing in all directions so that it can be very comprehensive.
But it cannot fulfill the need for a mother tongue to everybody. So everybody should be taught two languages from childhood. Every person has to be bilingual. And the gap can be bridged if both languages are brought in from the very beginning. It is not that one first learns the mother language up to a certain age and then starts learning another language; then the other language is never going to have the rootedness which the mother language has.
Any efforts like Esperanto are going to fail. They are arbitrary. They have taken everything good from this language, from that – eclectically. But a language has an organic unity which is missing in Esperanto.
One of my friends, a sannyasin, a traditional sannyasin, Swami Satyabhakta, has developed a language of his own. He was a linguist, knew many languages, and was developing a new language that could become a world language. He used to stay with me. I told him, “Don’t destroy your life unnecessarily. Many people have tried, but it simply does not work.”
I told him a small story. Charles Darwin’s birthday was being celebrated. He used to teach about birds, insects, animals – that was his whole life. The children of his family and the neighborhood all enjoyed his stories about exotic lands where he had visited and the different kinds of animals there.
The children had an idea: “Let us see whether he can find it or not….” They caught at least ten or twelve insects, cut pieces from them – somebody’s legs, somebody’s head, somebody’s wings, somebody’s tail – and they glued together all those different parts of the different insects. It looked like an insect. They pasted it well, framed it as a present for his birthday, and they all came to present it to him. They said to him, “We have only one question. We have found this insect; we just want to know the name of it.”
He looked at the insect. He had never seen such a thing in his whole life…and just in the neighborhood! How did these children get this? He has been searching all over the world…. Then he looked closer and he found that it was not one insect. They had been really clever; all the parts were separate and they were glued together. So he said, “Its name is ‘Humbug’!”
All these arbitrary languages are humbug. You can manage to give them a shape, but it doesn’t work.
But a vast area of the Far East is nonalphabetical, and it will be very difficult for Chinese or Japanese to exist in the future because, for scientific use, they are not the right languages; they are too big. Science needs precision, simplicity, directness. It wants to use as small an amount of letters as possible. That is a basic theory in science: use as few hypotheses as possible, because otherwise complexities grow.
So for a scientific future of the world, I don’t see that Chinese, Japanese or allied languages of the Far East, can survive. And it will be a sad thing if they don’t survive; they have a beauty of their own.
The only way for them to survive is that one international language be accepted and used for all scientific and international communications and research work – and their own mother tongue can continue to grow in its old path, with its old beauties and its old frailties. If this is not done, then either they will lag behind scientific progress or they will have to kill their own languages.
In India the same problem is there. There are thirty major languages, and all have their own beauty, something of a special quality. Hindi is the most widely understood and widely spoken language, and for forty years they have been trying to make Hindi the national language. But they have not succeeded, because it may be the majority language, but all other languages together….
Against each single language, Hindi is the major language. For example, forty percent of people speak it, and no other language has that majority. But all those other languages together are spoken by sixty percent; so as far as a fight is concerned, they are major. If a vote is to be taken they will defeat Hindi. They are not friendly with each other – they are against each other – but as far as Hindi is concerned, it is a common enemy and they are all together.
Only two percent of people understand English. But still I have suggested that India should accept thirty national languages and one international language. English should be the international language, because nobody is against it, it is nobody’s mother tongue. Nobody is for it, people are neutral about it. And if their national language is also accepted, then the area where their language is spoken can go on growing its own literature, its own poetry, its own drama, without any trouble. Except for that, there is no solution.
English should be taught from the very beginning, not at a later stage; otherwise, it will always remain superficial. And the world has to accept one language. It is just a coincidence that the British Empire has spread the English language, but the opportunity should be used. The English language should be made the international language by the U. N.
Each person should have two languages: one, his mother tongue; the other, his international language. And efforts should be made that both grow together as early as possible. Then the international language also enters into your being so that your mother tongue and your international language are interwoven. There is no conflict, and you have the capacity of smoothly moving from one language to another language – no question of translation, but a smooth movement – if both languages are available to you with the same roots within your being.
It is one of the significant questions facing humanity. But it is strange that humanity never decides anything that is significant. It goes on fighting about insignificant things, things that are meaningless. For centuries they have been wasting time and not bothering to see that unless you can create one international language, you cannot create one world. These are basic steps.
I am for one international language, and my choice is English – for the simple reason that it is already spread all over the world, although it is not the major language.
Of the major languages, first is Chinese. But it is confined only to China; it cannot become a world language. More people speak Chinese, read Chinese, than any other language. Out of five, one person speaks Chinese, but they are located only in China; it cannot have any possibility of spreading. And if you have to learn it for thirty years I don’t think it is wise to even advise that it should become a world language.
The second is Spanish, but its scope is also not as wide as English. And it is spoken not in the most advanced countries, but in the less advanced countries.
Third in number is English. Although less people speak it than Chinese or Spanish, it is spread over a wide area, and that is a more significant reason to make it an international language.
But people are concerned with such stupid things. Anando was just showing me a book review on Christianity in the Middle Ages.
I have said again and again that Christianity is a cancer – but that book review even shocked me!
In the Middle Ages they had special courts appointed by the pope and the Vatican where any woman could declare that her husband was impotent and that she wanted a divorce. And you cannot think of such stupidity – none of those bishops or cardinals had any knowledge of gynecology. And the court used to be full, because the man had to be naked before the court and show whether he was impotent or not.
It is a simple, well-known fact that if people are watching you, you cannot have an erection. With so many people around watching and the fear that if he does not succeed in having an erection he will be stamped impotent, divorced…. And even if he managed – if he could not manage, that was decisive, he was finished – if he managed an erection, that was not enough. He actually had to make love to his wife before the court – because you may have an erection and you may not be able to penetrate the woman.
And all this was being done in the name of religion! Humiliating!
And it was an everyday thing. Any woman in anger would simply go, knowing perfectly well that her husband was not impotent. But to show your potency in public is a totally different affair.
All those cardinals and bishops sitting and lining the court as judges were nothing but voyeurs. On a table the naked woman is lying and the man is trying to make love to her before this whole crowd of stupid people. In what kind of things humanity has been involved! – And it continued for centuries.
It was also easy for a man to divorce – very easy. He just had to declare that he is impotent and stand there naked without an erection. Just take a cold bath and stand there in the court so it is proved that you are impotent – and sealed, a divorce is given to the woman. And all these people had great theological degrees and honors – and some of these people were going to become, in turn, popes.
But humanity has remained involved with stupid things. Even if it was such an important thing, then a gynecological doctor and his dispensary – that would be the place to check the man and then inform the court, not in the court itself. But they really were voyeurs; they wanted to see living pornography. They were talking against pornography while creating living pornography, and never thinking for a second that they were reducing two human beings almost to animals, degrading them from humanity.
But you can look from every aspect, from any corner, and you will find the so-called great religious leaders, political leaders, concerned with such stupid and small things – while the bigger issues, the real issues, are not even discussed.
I don’t think anybody is bothering about whether there should be a world language, because that is the very foundation for one world.

Osho,
Hearing you talk about the difference between being a disciple and a devotee, I realized how far away I still am from devotion. My mind imagines dependency; but something else in me moves towards being dissolved and sucked into your being, in spite of all the fears. I experience those moments of disappearance – they are tremendously relaxing, but on the other hand they are painfully short.
Can I turn into a devotee only when I reach to the center of the cyclone, or is it a condition for reaching there?
It can happen both ways. Either you reach the center of the cyclone and you become a devotee, or you become a devotee and you will reach the center of the cyclone. They are not two things, just two ways of saying the same thing.
And don’t be worried that you are too far away; you are not. Even if you have moments when you feel a merger, that is enough indication that greater moments will be coming. But don’t be greedy; greed is destructive. And don’t be desirous; desire is obstructive.
Go on flowing the way you are flowing. You are exactly on the right path. It doesn’t matter whether you become a devotee or you reach the center of the cyclone; they are two names of the same space.
It is going to happen to everybody – whoever is courageous enough to remain in tune with me just a little more. I don’t ask you for many years, for many lives – but just a little more; because my experience is, if you can go deeper for a few moments it will be beyond you to go back. Once you have passed the barrier from where a person can go back, then there is no fear, then you can take it at ease. It may happen tomorrow or the day after tomorrow – it doesn’t matter.
My concern is only that somehow I should help you to cross the barrier from where you cannot return.
Beyond that, existence takes care of you.

Osho,
A few years back, every night when I was going off to sleep I would go into a space that was in between sleep and wakefulness and feel like I was leaving my body. There was no effort on my part; it was happening on its own. It felt like I would always only go a little way out, and then my body would suddenly jerk – although there was no outer or inner disturbance – and immediately I would return to my body.
Now this space has not come up for me for a while. I'm wondering if it is that I am less relaxed. Also, what was holding me back when it was happening that did not allow me to go out further?
First, there is no need to be worried about it. Out-of-body experiences are good nourishment for your spiritual growth, but they are not necessary. So if they are happening, or just by relaxing they come upon you, it is good; otherwise, don’t bother about them. They don’t have any essential meaning for your growth.
So just out of curiosity don’t try to get out of your body. It won’t work. It either works spontaneously for certain reasons of which you are not aware…and I cannot say what the reasons were in your situation at that moment which caused your being to go out of the body.
One thing is certain: whenever you spontaneously get out of the body, the body will give a jerk – because it is the death of the body, and you are going into a dangerous state.
If something happens that disturbs your coming back, if somebody suddenly opens the door and your silver cord is broken…. The body has its own wisdom; it allows you a certain rope of freedom, so it allowed you in a certain state to go out, but not to go too far. That’s where it jerked, and that jerk was enough to bring you back because the relaxation was gone.
And now it is not happening; there is no need, because it helps in no way in your spiritual growth. It only helps you to become a more authentic seeker, because you know your being as a truth. But if you are a seeker already, it will not be happening.
There is no need to worry about it. Always remember: whatever happens, let it happen. Enjoy it. When it does not happen, just forget about it; perhaps its work is done. Don’t get puzzled, worried about it – why it happened, why it is not happening.
This is what I call trust: something happens, you enjoy it; something does not happen, you enjoy that too. And whatever is necessary for your spiritual growth, existence will go on leading you towards it. Simply leave yourself in the hands of the unknown.

============================================================

Osho,
When I was a boy, between twelve and fifteen years old, I often had, lying in my bed in the dark, strange experiences which I loved very much. It started by my imagining that my bed disappeared, then my room, the house, the town, all people, the country, the whole globe…Everything in the universe faded. There was utter darkness and silence; I was just floating in space.
The disappearance of the last material things created a tremendous whirling around me. I was sucked into it; this feeling was almost sexual. It created a sweet, pulling sensation in my belly, which could last for seconds or sometimes for one to two minutes.
I never talked to my parents or anybody else about it, because I feared they might think me mad.
Osho, what was this experience?
There is a Tantra method in which one does exactly the same exercise as you are describing from your childhood. For children it is easy, but for grown-ups also, it is not impossible. It is simply an exercise of the imagination. But that does not mean that what you experience is unreal.
First, let me tell you about a Tantra method. It is for all ages. It has to be done in the dark, because in the dark you cannot see things, so it is easy to imagine that they have disappeared.
Lying down is the most appropriate posture for it. Because man became man, attained a little bit of consciousness by standing up on his two feet – he became vertical – the blood stream now reaches less to his head than when he is lying horizontal. Lying down, the blood reaches in a greater quantity with more speed just because of gravitation. When you stand up, the blood has to go against gravitation; its flow is slowed down, its quantity is cut.
That’s why no other animal has a conscious mind. Even when walking, a cow, a horse, a buffalo – they are horizontal. Their heads are receiving as much blood as any other part of the body. They cannot grow the very subtle, very small cells which enable man to think.
But there is a possibility – and as far as I am concerned it is a certainty – that animals do imagine. They don’t have a conscious mind, but they do have an unconscious mind.
Watching a dog you can see it. A dog is sleeping nearby; you can just watch: once in a while he will try to catch an imaginary fly, a fly which is not there. What is he doing? He imagined it. That catching of the fly which is not there must have been to him a reality in his imagination. And, of course, dogs think of flies just as men think of women.
Nobody has tried to explore the unconscious of the animals. We are not even finished with man, so the question of animals does not arise. They are far back in the queue, standing and waiting. But the wisdom of people has always attributed a certain intelligence to animals.
Aesop’s fables are fables about man, but all the actors are animals. panch tantra, the ancientmost book of stories, has fables which talk about man because they are written by man, but the actors, participants…everybody is an animal. And in every country there are ancient books in which animals are taking part, just like man. For example, in one of Aesop’s fables, a little goat – a kid – is drinking water from a mountain stream, and the king of the animals, the lion, comes by. It is breakfast time, and the kid is just a perfect breakfast. But even animals have to find excuses first, so the lion says to the goat, “Kid, you are very arrogant; you see the emperor of the whole animal kingdom, and yet you are muddying the water which I am going to drink.”
The poor kid says, “Uncle, the stream is going this way. I cannot make the water muddy for you; you are standing above me. The stream comes first to you and then to me. This is too much.”
He was right. The lion becomes very angry and he says, “You don’t know manners – how to talk with elders. The same was so with your father. Yesterday he was talking with me and he misbehaved. I was engaged in some political work, but I am searching for him.”
The kid says, “Forgive me, uncle, my father has been dead for a few weeks; he could not have insulted you yesterday.”
Finding no excuse, the lion still catches the kid and tells him, “You talk against your elders? I will teach you a lesson – and the lesson is a good breakfast.”
A story about animals but not about animals, it is about man, his inhumanity to those who are weak, powerless, poor. But still, for manners’ sake, you have to find some excuse.
These stories have always been interpreted as parables for children, but my feeling is there is something more to it. It indicates that animals may not be thinking, but they still dream – because dreaming does not need anybody to stand erect.
For dreaming you also have to lie down, to be in a horizontal position, so the conscious mind cannot function. It needs only a very small quantity of blood; with a greater quantity it goes to sleep. If an even greater quantity comes, it becomes dead. But the unconscious mind goes on working. Of course its language is not alphabetical; its language is of pictures.
So a small child lying down on his bed can very easily visualize that the walls are disappearing, the room is disappearing, the bed is disappearing, the trees outside are disappearing. Everything is disappearing and the world is fading…only he is left in his total aloneness in this beautiful dark deep silence.
But this is a method prescribed by Tantra scriptures that anybody can do – and it will be helpful for meditation.
It is an unfortunate thing that parents are unaware of the whole heritage of man. In different directions man has been working to develop consciousness. If all that is available to the parents, perhaps they will not think you are going crazy; they will rejoice, they will help you, they will reward you. They will try to help you so you can go deeper into the experience.
You have found, accidentally, a right door. And the child can have from the very beginning a taste of meditation, and he can go on helping it grow every day. By the time he is a young man he will have a mature meditativeness. Then there is no need to lie down on the bed. He can sit or stand, and he can go into the same silence – even with open eyes. It is just a question of going more and more into the same experience so it becomes easy, simple.
But all the societies have condemned everything that can help your being to evolve. They don’t want it. If you had told anybody, you would have been condemned as mad: “Stop it; otherwise you are risking your sanity.” And in fact by stopping it you risked your sanity.
That’s why I say that every father, every mother, should go through a certain training in which they are taught how to be a father, how to be a mother; where they are made aware that the child is very potent, and that he can manage many things that you cannot, and that this is the time. If you stop him, later on it will become more and more difficult.
Your experience, Premda, was good, immensely good. And if you try it again, perhaps you may be able to enter the same space without any trouble. We are here together to go into all these experiences; these are different ways of touching your own being.
The method is imagination. The walls don’t disappear, and neither do the trees or anything else. That is only a device. But if you can visualize their disappearing, naturally, only you are left, which cannot disappear whatever you do. No imagination is possible to make you disappear; the watcher is beyond imagination, beyond mind. What has remained is a watcher, a witness – and that is your pure consciousness.
So don’t be worried that what you have used as a strategy was imagination. It doesn’t matter, because you were not interested in walls disappearing; that was just to create a space in which you are freed from everything – whether it is there or not – and you come to the beautiful aloneness of your being. Just a moment of it is an eternity.
And this is a prescribed Tantra method, well established for centuries. You cannot go mad. In fact, anything that could have led you into madness has disappeared; now only pure consciousness is there. Pure consciousness has never gone mad.
So what happened in childhood was good. It would have been better if you had continued, but you can start again – because anything that has happened once, leaves a certain mark in you; you can start from there again. It may take a little trouble, it may not be so easy, but it will come – in one day, two days, it will come. And if it doesn’t come, then you go to Kaveesha.

Osho,
The other night, along with a few other people, I was hypnotized by Kaveesha. When she began by asking us to take deep breaths – the Zen flute playing, the incense and the candle burning – I immediately went into a space where my chest felt full, like tears were welling up inside. I felt like I was in a space that I once was in before – a place where I was closest to my inner home, a place my body was relaxed in, where meditation came naturally and the surroundings were warm.
Why was there sadness coming up when this experience was happening?
With every experience of this kind you will feel a certain sadness coming to you. The sadness is: “Why does this experience not remain forever?” The sadness simply signifies your deep longing for this state to become stable. And it is a natural phenomenon: whenever you feel something that is of immense beauty and peace, you would like to remain in it forever, to feel there is nothing that can bring you out of it. But one has to come out of it – and that brings sadness.
But don’t take that sadness in any negative way. It is a good indicator. It simply shows that you should practice it more – go deeper – and one day it becomes a natural phenomenon. Twenty-four hours a day you are surrounded with a fragrance, with a light, with silence within. Twenty-four hours a day you are relaxed, there is no tension in your body, in your mind. But before it comes, many times you will feel sad – “Why is it not a permanent state of my being?”
It is simply a longing that is becoming sadness. The window opens, you see the sunset; and before you have even seen it and the beauty has been absorbed, the window closes. And there is sadness: “The window could have remained open a little more.” But the window opens only according to your capacity. Whatever you have earned, the window remains open only for that long. Beyond that it can be dangerous.
So don’t feel bad about sadness; it is a safety too. Even in experiences of oneself, safety measures are needed. But nature has them already prepared for you. You will have a glimpse only for that much time and to that much depth – as much as you deserve – neither less nor more. And it is good, because if you get more you will not be able to absorb it.
Everybody who is meditating comes to a point when he starts feeling, “Why does meditation not continue the whole day?” But he does not know that he is not capable of handling the world and its affairs with meditation running as an undercurrent. He will be in difficulty. He may be in great danger: the world has no need of meditation. You will have just as much as you deserve, and you should feel thankful for it. It will be growing…with your gratitude it will be growing.
But sadness can become a barrier, because each time you come to the window you will have sadness; they will become associated. And the law of association is really a difficult law. Then it will become more and more difficult to get rid of sadness.
So simply don’t pay any attention to sadness. If it comes, take it in the natural way. It is natural; you had a beautiful experience, and it has gone. Sadness is simply its going away, a friend departing. But don’t give more importance to it. Ignore it; accepting it as natural, ignore it.
You know about Pavlov, one Russian psychologist, who in the beginning of this century proved the law of association – which is his great contribution. In Russia you will not hear the name of Freud, Adler or Jung – only Pavlov. He has developed a totally different psychology – Pavlovian psychology. And because it fits with communism, they have rejected all other psychologies; there is only one psychology, and that is Pavlovian. It is not a complete picture of the human psyche, but this law is certainly true.
He used to give his dog…all his experiments were with dogs…he had seventy dogs. Even after the revolution when private property was dissolved, the communist government allowed him to have private property – because how could he manage his seventy dogs and a big lab with strange kinds of instruments? But his psychology was proving in some way that communism should be allowed. He was the only man in the Soviet Union who was allowed to remain exactly the same way as before the revolution.
He would feed the dog, and while the dog was eating he would go on ringing a bell. Now, a bell has nothing to do with food; you can ring a bell before any dog and he will not take any interest. He will think that you are a little crackpot: “What are you doing ringing a bell before a dog? What is the point?” He may even turn away just to avoid listening to your ringing bell.
But you could not have expected what happened to Pavlov’s dogs. After fifteen days of feeding the dog and at the same time ringing the bell, on the sixteenth day there was no food, just the ringing of the bell – and the dog was ready for food, his tongue hanging out. And this was done with not one dog but seventy dogs. He was a scientist: one dog cannot prove anything, you need to have enough evidence – seventy dogs. As the bell was ringing, their saliva was dripping, their tongues were hanging out. Nobody could believe that with the ringing of a bell this could happen. This he called the law of association.
While he was eating, the dog was also listening to the ringing of the bell. The eating of the food and the listening to the bell became associated in his mind. They became locked, so much so that not only when you rang the bell was the dog ready for food – although there was no food – but he was perfectly ready to eat. And vice versa: when the food was there, he was waiting for the bell to ring and he would not eat.
That was a surprise to Pavlov himself. He was thinking that the first thing was okay – that the bell became associated with food. But food is associated with hunger and biology…. The dog would look at him as if to say, “What are you doing? Ring the bell!” – because it had become locked. Without the ringing of the bell, the dog would not feel that the food was juicy. It became a kind of music that helped him to taste the food better – and not one dog but seventy dogs were behaving in the same way.
So always remember this law. When you are entering inwards, don’t get associated with anything that can become a hindrance.
For example, when you feel some beautiful, blissful experience, sadness is bound to come – because that experience will go. But don’t pay too much attention to the sadness, just think that it is natural: “It only shows my longing that the experience should continue.” Otherwise, if you pay too much attention to sadness you are creating an interlock system in your mind, so that whenever you have a beautiful experience, immediately your mind will produce sadness – whether it is now necessary or not.
Emphasize the positive, be grateful for the positive, rejoice in the positive – and ignore the negative that is bound to follow like a shadow.
When your friend leaves your home, departs, do you pay much attention to his shadow? You don’t even take note of it. In the same way, remember: anything beautiful happening to you will have a shadow to it, until you come to a stage when the twenty-four hours of your day are lit up and there is no shadow possible.
That happens – that will happen – but you have to keep these things in your awareness. When sadness comes, thank sadness too: “You are simply my longing for the beautiful experience.” In this way you are cutting the roots of sadness, you are not making it a polar opposite to your experience. You are changing the whole arrangement. You are saying to it, “I know you are my longing for that beautiful experience; but it will come, and it will be coming more and more.”
In this way, even through sadness you are emphasizing the beautiful experience, its longing. You are not making sadness a separate entity, in itself important. If it becomes a separate entity, it will become associated; then you can’t have a twenty-four-hour-a-day, waking, sleeping meditativeness, you will have only fragments…alternating, a beautiful moment and sadness. And as the beautiful moment will become deepened, the sadness will also become deepened; it is its shadow.
So on the one hand you will be earning ecstasy; on the other hand you will be suffering again – and the whole fault will be yours. From the very beginning, be careful. Don’t give it any independent existence. Thank it: “You remind me of the beautiful experience; you remind me that the beautiful experience should be continued.” And soon it will happen.
So make it secondary, just an epiphenomenon. And as your aloneness will be deepening, the sadness will not be deepening, because you are not giving juice to it; it will remain shallow. And soon a day will come: you will come out of your meditation and you will not find sadness. Now, you have accepted that there are moments of meditation and there are moments of no-meditation; but there is no question of sadness. You have dropped the desire and the longing which were creating the sadness, and you have not paid any attention to it. It has died of its own accord.
Attention is food.
We are not aware of many things which we are living…. In one scientific experiment, two baby monkeys are fed the same food, given the same medical care, the same comforts…everything is the same. Just one thing is different for one baby monkey: the doctor gives him attention – pets him, sits with him, plays with him. And with the second he simply does his duty – no communication, no human warmth, no attention. The monkey that is given attention survives; the monkey that is not given attention dies. The same experiment has been done on other animals; the result is always the same.
Now it is to be accepted that attention is some kind of nourishment. By giving attention to anything you are pouring your warmth, your love, and you are saying, “There is somebody for whom you have to exist, there is somebody who will miss you.”
The other baby monkey, he lives, but there is nobody for whom he lives; there is no meaning in his life. Nobody pays attention to him, nobody communicates with him. It does not matter whether he lives or not. If he dies nobody is going to shed a single tear for him. That idea itself kills him. But it is the idea – “If I die somebody will miss me, somebody will come and sit by my cradle and weep” – that revives the spirit.
So, attention is a very psychological nourishment, a psychological vitamin. And the same is true about your emotions, your feelings, anything that you are doing.
Remember the rule: whatever you want to save, give attention to it, pour your love on it, appreciate it. And whatever you want to disappear from your life, ignore it…at the most thank it: “You remind me of the positive and the beautiful feeling.” That is a sure killer.
One of my friends married a woman…he used to love another woman, but he could not marry her. She was of a high-caste Hindu brahmin family, and he was of a low caste. She was rich, he was poor. And in India it is very difficult – an intercaste marriage – because you then become an outcast. You will not get a job, people will not like to talk to you, you will not get a house for rent – a simple boycott. And you cannot live if the society boycotts you completely.
But finally he married another woman.
I asked him, “What are you doing?”
He said, “She looks exactly like the woman I wanted to love.”
I said, “That’s true. But she is not the woman you loved, she only looks like her. And the moment she discovers it – and she’s bound to discover it as you cannot hide it – it will kill her.”
He said, “No, how she can find out? I have confided only in you, and I know you are not going to tell her.”
I said, “I am not going to tell her. You, yourself, with your behavior, will tell her twenty-four hours a day.”
And within two years the woman was badly sick. I went to see her. She was a young woman just two years before. I could not believe how she had withered away. I asked, “What has happened?”
She said, “Nobody can understand, but perhaps you can. He has married me because I look like the girl he loved. But he does not love me; he only pretends. But his pretending cannot satisfy me. I don’t want to be anybody else’s substitute, I want to be myself. My sickness is not of the body, my sickness is of the soul. I will never say it to him because he has suffered much. The first woman he loved, he could not get. And now I should not make more suffering for him. It is better I should die.”
I said, “This is nonsense – you have your own life.”
She said, “I don’t; I am only a substitute. When he hugs me I know whom he is really hugging. He does not give me any warmth. When he loves me I know whom he is really loving, and suddenly I become cold.”
Within two months she died, and I told the man, “You are a murderer because you don’t understand a simple fact of life – that people cannot live by bread alone. They need something more: they need attention, they need love.”
And attention and love are very invisible nourishment. But the same is true about your emotions, so never feed any negative emotion. Pour all your love, all your energy, into a positive experience. And the day will not be far away when the experience will start spreading as an undercurrent into the twenty-four hours of your day.

Osho,
I feel emotionally totally exhausted. Something is ripping me apart, but I can't figure out what. In the last few days I've been through intense spells of hating myself. It feels like an attack, and it looks impossible to love such a creature. On another level I am telling myself to watch, be aware of these emotions, telling myself they are not real. But when I am caught up in them, everything is totally real – it just depends on what level has the upper hand at the time. When I step outside of this inner turmoil I can see this insane person going through her daily routine, acting quite normally.
Is this the way to grow, or am I just plainly cuckoo, schizophrenic, stuck in a circle?
Everybody goes through the circle; it is normal. Only one thing you are doing wrong – which will make you take longer to get rid of the misery – and that is: when you feel these negative emotions about yourself, don’t try to watch them. It is not yet the ripe time. Simply live them.
It is watching that is giving you the idea of a schizophrenic or split personality – because on the one hand you have these negative feelings about yourself, and on the other hand you are trying to remind yourself that you are just a watcher and these are just images which will fade away. You are cutting yourself in two.
The first thing I suggest is: don’t cut yourself in two.
I would have suggested to you to be watchful, but the time is not ripe, you cannot be. Before you can be totally one with watchfulness, you have to go through the hell of all your negative emotions; otherwise they will be repressed and they will erupt at any moment, at any weak time.
So it is better to get rid of them. But getting rid of them does not mean you have to be watchful. First, forget about watchfulness. Live each emotion that you feel; it is you. Hateful, ugly, unworthy – whatever it is, you be actually in it. First give them a chance to come up totally into the conscious. Right now, by your effort of watchfulness you are repressing them into the unconscious. And then you get involved in your day-to-day work and you force them back again. That is not the way to get rid of them.
Let them come out – live them, suffer them. It will be difficult and tedious but immensely rewarding. Once you have lived them, suffered them, accepted them, that this is you, that you have not made yourself in this way so you need not condemn yourself, that this is the way you have found yourself – once they are lived consciously, without any repression, you will be surprised that they are disappearing on their own. Their force on you is becoming less, their grip on your neck is no longer that tight. And when they are going away, there may be a time when you can start watching.
In the East they have a parable: an elephant passes through a door…the elephant has passed, but his shadow is still inside the door and it looks almost like the elephant. This is the time when the elephant has passed and only the shadow has remained. That you can watch – because shadows cannot go into the unconscious; shadows don’t have any existence. If you are watchful, aware, the shadow will die, disappear. But first let the elephant go.
You are keeping the elephant in. You can hide the elephant inside, but for how long? And you will be carrying the elephant and its weight all the time. In each of your actions it will have some influence. You will do things but there will be anger, you will do things but there will be hatred, you will do things but almost like a zombie – because that elephant is too heavy.
And you are not responsible for it. In fact, nobody is responsible for it. God used to be responsible, but he is dead; that was his only function. You can call the society responsible, you can call the parents responsible, but that does not help. That may give you a kind of solace, but it is not a solution. Remember, nobody is responsible; this is the way you have found yourself.
And I don’t see that there is anything abnormal in it; everybody passes through it more or less. One thing has to be remembered: the bigger the elephant you are carrying within you, the bigger will be the release and freedom. So everything is balance. Your suffering may be great, but your blessing will also be great. So don’t be bothered by it. What is wrong in it?
Just live it.
For you, for the time being, the only way is to live it totally, so that the elephant can come out unafraid: “Now I am ready to live; there is no problem to hide.” And once everything comes into the conscious mind it disperses, and when only the shadow is there, that is the time to become aware. Right now it will create schizophrenia; then it will create enlightenment.
And never be worried about big problems. All our problems are small. We are small – how can there be big problems? Secondly, whatever the depth of the problem will be the depth of your freedom, of your benediction when the problem disappears. So you will be perfectly balanced.
But remember not to repress. Your idea of being watchful right now is nothing but repression.
I will tell you one day – you will ask me one day – “Now it is the time to start being awake.” Just a little patience…and we all can afford it.

Osho,
Why do I always feel like you are pulling my big toe when you answer my questions?
Milarepa, I am pulling everybody’s toe, but nobody is crazy enough to confess it. Everybody knows it…because do you think I come here to speak? I come here to pull your big toe. And everybody knows – but nobody tells it to anybody else!

============================================================

Osho,
When you relate to us the stories of your student days, or your time as a professor, I often wonder what it must have been like to have been one of those studying with you or under you – I know I certainly would have had a crush on you. I imagine your fellow students were both wary and admiring of you. Your own students must have enjoyed you tremendously. I was intrigued when you mentioned recently that you started a small meditation group in the university. I should love to hear you talk about how you affected the lives of those around you. I often wonder if they have followed your various exploits through the media and other friends. Quite possibly this is simply one of those questions which fall under the category of mere curiosity, but I adore it when you talk about your earlier days. It makes me feel I loved you even before I knew you.
The students who studied with me had strange feelings about me. Different persons have different ideas about me. The majority was certainly against me for the simple reason that to them I appeared as a disturbance. They were not there for any search, they were there to attain a degree, to find a job, to have a family. I was not interested either in the examinations or in the degrees, my focus was always in the present, on the subject that was being taught. And I wanted to explore it exhaustively.
The majority was against that, because if each subject has to be studied in such an exhaustive way, then the syllabus cannot be completed in three years…it cannot even be completed in two hundred years…and they were worried about their examinations. My concern and their concern were totally different – diametrically opposite.
I was interested in the moment, in the subject; they were not interested in the subject, they were only interested in taking notes, preparing for the future examination. I have never taken any notes; neither have I allowed any student, when I became a professor, to take notes in my class, because taking notes means you have moved to the future, you are not here now, you are preparing for somewhere else, for something else.
Even professors continually encouraged students – and I think that is the practice all over the world – to take notes of important things they are teaching, without understanding the simple fact that while a student is concerned with taking notes, he is not being totally available to what is being taught.
I told my professors, “It is unimaginable for me that you people encourage rather than discourage an activity which is a direct insult to you. You are teaching; the taught should be totally alert, listening to it, absorbing it, drinking it. Not one of you bothers about it. You tell them to take notes; you are teaching them postponement for the future.”
The teachers were against me, the majority of the students were against me, but these were the mediocre people.
There were a few students who were immensely in love with me because what they could not question out of fear, what they could not present in an articulate way as an argument, I could. And they all enjoyed. I became, in a certain way, their spokesman. They were more interested in my arguments than in what the teacher was saying, because my arguments were taking the subject to its deeper roots.
A few teachers were also there who loved me. But very few enjoyed and openly accepted that my argument was weightier than their own argument. They said, “But please remember that my argument will help you to pass the examination. Your argument will not help.”
I told them, “I have no concern with the examination at all. Whether I fail or pass, that is not the point. To me, the point is whether I present myself sincerely, authentically.”
In my final MA examination, one of my professors was very much concerned because my paper was going to be examined by an old professor of Allahabad University who was world famous as a scholar on Indian philosophical thought – Dr. Ranade. And it was well-known that to get a passing mark from him was the most you could hope for. He has, all over the country, a name for that. Mostly, people failed; his criteria were not ordinarily fulfilled.
My paper was also going to be examined by him, so my teacher of Indian philosophy was very much concerned. I told him, “Relax, because it is my examination, not your examination!”
He could not sleep. He said, “I know you are going into a difficulty. That man is a little eccentric, and he is such an authority that nobody can challenge him.”
I said, “The need will not arise. Who knows, he may be waiting for me. I may be his criterion.”
He laughed; he said, “You don’t know him. He has failed so many people and he has not given a first class rating to anybody in his whole life. And now he is retired. But still because of his fame, universities go on sending him examination papers.”
It was almost as if he was going into the examination. I had to console him and tell him to relax and rest and not be worried.
And I did just what he was afraid of…I did exactly that because I could not do anything else. My answers to his paper, his question paper, became rather an argument, and that’s what my professor was worried about: “He is such an authority that nobody questions him. And you will create a situation in which he may feel offended. He may give you zero; he has given zero to many people.”
His first question was “What is Indian philosophy?” and I simply answered in one line: “There is no such thing in the world. The question is absurd and does not deserve any more wastage of time for the simple reason that philosophy cannot be divided by geography; you are putting geography on a higher scale than philosophy. Now, what has philosophy to do with geography? Thoughts have no geographical boundaries, they are universal. There is only one philosophy, and that is universal. So never again ask such a question.”
Certainly he must have been shocked because he was not expecting…and his whole life people have been polite to him. And now he was an ancient, wise man…but all his questions I answered in the same way. And when I told my teacher how I had answered his questions, tears came to his eyes.
I said, “You are mad! I am going to be given a mark of zero because he cannot give less than that. But why are you…?”
He said, “I feel for you. I understand you. What you are saying is right. But right is not the question; the question is what is acceptable, what the knowledgeable people recognize as right.”
But Dr. Ranade really proved to be a man of integrity. He gave me ninety-nine percent and wrote a special note to the vice-chancellor mentioning that the note should be shown to me. And the note was: “You shocked me as nobody ever has. But your answers were original, and you did not care at all whether you were going to pass or fail. You were so total in each of your answers that it was irrelevant what happened to be the result. I loved your totality, I loved your intensity, I loved your originality – and for the first time I have come across a student I have been waiting for.”
The vice-chancellor called me. My teacher said, “Some note against you must have come because the papers have come back. I am coming with you.” And when he saw the note he could not believe it. He said, “Today I can say that miracles happen. I was thinking you were going to get zero, and you have ninety-nine percent!”
And Dr. Ranade had mentioned in his note, “I was going to give you one hundred percent but that may look as if I am favoring you too much; that’s why I have taken off the one percent. It is not that something is wrong in your answers, it is just my old habit, a lifelong habit of cutting. I cannot do much, but at least I can take off one percent.”
I enjoyed my student life immensely. Whether people were against me, for me, indifferent, loved me…all those experiences were beautiful. All that helped me immensely when I myself became a teacher, because I could see the students’ viewpoint simultaneously when I was presenting mine.
And my classes became debating clubs. Everybody was allowed to doubt, to argue. Once in a while somebody started worrying about what would happen to the course, because on each single point there was so much argument.
I said, “Don’t be worried. All that is needed is a sharpening of your intelligence. The course is a small thing – you can read for it in one night. If you have a sharp mind, even without reading for it you can answer. But if you don’t have a sharp mind, even the book can be provided to you and you will not be able to find where the answer is. In a five hundred page book the answer must be somewhere in one paragraph.”
In Russia they have already experimented with it, and they have made significant conclusions. They allow students to carry as many books as they want. They allow students to ask the teacher in the examination hall, “I need a certain book.” Immediately it will be brought from the library.
Their understanding is that the old kind of examination was only an examination of the memory; now this is an examination of your intelligence. You have to find an answer – and you can find it only if you have studied, argued, known those books. Only then can you find the answer. In a dozen books you cannot immediately find the question and its answer.
They were surprised to find out that in the ordinary old-style examinations – as they do all over the world – certain students come first. With the same class, with the new methodology – where all books are available – a different kind of student comes first, not the same old ones who were coming first, because now it is an examination of intelligence not of memory. Now memory is not of much help. You need a sharpness, an understanding of what is being asked, and you need to be well read so that either you know the answer by yourself or you can consult the books. But the time is limited; if you are not sharp enough, within three hours you may not be able to answer even one question.
And the phenomenon that a different category of students comes first and the category that was coming first gets a second class rating, a third class rating, definitely proves that intelligence is a totally different phenomenon from memory. Memory can create servants, slaves, computers, not intelligent people.
So my classes were totally different. Everything had to be discussed, everything had to be looked into, in the deepest possible way, from every corner, from every aspect – and accepted only if your intelligence felt satisfied. Otherwise, there was no need to accept it; we could continue the discussion the next day.
And I was amazed to know that when you discuss something and discover the logical pattern, the whole fabric, you need not remember it. It is your own discovery; it remains with you. You cannot forget it.
My students certainly loved me because nobody else would give them so much freedom, nobody else would give them so much respect, nobody else would give them so much love, nobody else would help them to sharpen their intelligence.
Every teacher was concerned about his salary. I myself never went to collect the salary. I would just give my authority to a student and say, “Whenever the first day of the month comes, you collect the salary, and you can bring it to me. And if you need any part of it you can keep it.”
All the years I was in the university somebody or other was bringing me my salary. The man who was distributing the salaries once came to see me just to say, “You never appear. I have been hoping that sometime you would come and I would see you. But seeing that perhaps you will never come to the office, I have come to your house just to see what kind of man you are – because there are professors who start early in the morning, on the first of each month, lining up for their salary. You are always missing. Any student might appear with your signature and authority, and I don’t know whether the salary reaches you or not.”
I said, “You need not be worried, it has always been reaching me.” When you trust someone, it is very difficult for them to deceive.
All the years I was a teacher, not a single student to whom I had given the authority had taken any part of it, although I had told them, “It is up to you. If you feel like having it all, you can have it. If you want to keep a part of it you can keep it. And it is not lent to you so that you have to return it, because I don’t want to be bothered by remembering who owes how much money to me. It is simply yours; it doesn’t matter.” But not a single student ever took any part of the salary.
All the teachers were interested only in the salary, in the competition of getting higher posts. I have seen nobody who was really interested in the students and their future and particularly in their spiritual growth.
Seeing that, I opened a small school of meditation. One of my friends offered his beautiful bungalow and garden, and he made a marble temple for me, for meditations, so at least fifty people could sit and meditate in the temple. Many students, many professors – even the vice-chancellors came to understand what meditation is, tried….
But as I left the university and I initiated the movement of sannyas, a tremendous change happened. My initiation of the movement of sannyas created trouble. None of my colleagues – teachers who had been with me for years – would even come to see me. Some were Hindus, some were Mohammedans, some were Jainas – and I was a rebellious spirit. I belonged to nobody.
And the people who used to come to me – I was still teaching the same meditation – started spreading opposition to me, because now it was a question of their religion, their tradition, their church. They did not even come to understand that I am doing the same thing. Just because my people have started wearing red clothes does not mean that my teaching has changed. I just wanted to give an identity to my people so that they could be known all over the world and they could be recognized everywhere.
But they stopped coming – not only teachers but even students who had loved me. And then I saw that all our love and all our respect, all our friendship is so shallow that if our tradition, our convention, our old, ancient beliefs are in some way attacked, all our love, all our friendship disappears.
You will be surprised: even the friend who had given me his bungalow and had the marble temple made especially for me sent a message – he could not face me himself – he sent a message from his manager that because I did not belong to any ancient path, I should not use his place for my meditation school…as if anything old is bound to be gold. Most probably the older it is, the more rotten it is.
I sent him a message, “I will leave your house and the temple, and you can do whatsoever you want with it. But I am with the sunrise; I am not with the sunset. And I want the whole world to be with the new and not with the old.”
Truth always moves with the fresh and the young and the innocent. It dies with the knowledgeable, the scholarly, the clever, the so-called wise – who are really otherwise.
After sannyas, there was a demarcation line. The people who used to know me before, slowly, slowly backed away. New people, new faces started coming. And this has been going on with each new phase of my work. A few old faces disappear and a few new faces bring new blood and new juice to the movement.
From all over the world messages have come to me that at every center, even though the whole movement is in a difficulty – I do not have a home, the movement does not have a headquarters – from each small center news goes on coming that new people are becoming sannyasins, people who we have never thought would become sannyasins. The pressure from all the governments of the world is helping immensely. Anybody who is courageous, who has some respect for freedom, some taste of intelligence, has started coming into the movement.
A few old faces will be lost, and it is good that they are lost. Perhaps they were no longer in tune; their time was over. You can be with me only if you are alive. The moment you are dead, we simply celebrate. We say good-bye to you, and you vacate a space for some new one, some new blood, new life, a new flower to take your place. This has been going on….
There are many layers of people who have been with me and have dropped. Only very few people have remained with me from the very beginning; they are the most blessed ones. Since they have come they have broken their bridges, they have forgotten to look backwards. They know they have come to the home they were searching for and seeking, and now there is nowhere else to go.
One thing is certain: those who for some reason or other are left on the road, who have moved in some other direction, will never find again the same love, the same light, the same understanding. They will miss me forever. And this is going to be my last life, because I will not be in the body again – so I feel sorry for them.
Those who are with me can understand it, what those people are missing – people who for some small reason, some excuse, departed on their own. I have never told anybody to leave – I am always a welcome. I feel sad for them, because they cannot find any other place on this planet. They will always remain missing, and because of their ego they will not be able to come back.
But the whole journey has been of tremendous joy. I started alone, and then people went on coming without my calling them, without my inviting them. The caravan began to become bigger and bigger, and now it is spread all over the world.
This bigness and this spontaneous coming of people has made all the politicians and all the religious people tremendously afraid. Their fear is not unfounded. They know that they cannot give what people can get somewhere else; hence, their efforts are to prevent me from reaching people, to prevent people from reaching me – in such ugly ways. It was good in a way to know that this whole world for which I have been struggling my whole life to make a better world…. But I have never been in such contact all around the world.
From one island, the prime minister himself has invited me to come there and said that he would love it if I accepted his invitation. I sent Jayesh and Hasya to see the place, and when they reached there – just today they informed us – the prime minister asked for one billion dollars as a bribe.
This is our world.
He invites me himself, and I sent my people to work out how many people he can give permanent residence to, how many people will be coming every year to visit. When they arrived he immediately – he didn’t even bother to talk about anything else – he immediately said, “I am ready to accept, but the price is one billion dollars, cash.”
These are our political leaders.
In another country we are trying to purchase a castle. Because my name is involved, the price immediately goes so high. The owner is asking nine million dollars for the castle! He cannot sell it for nine million even if he tries for his whole life.
And this is not all – he is asking almost double the price…. The country has two parties, and each party wants some money so there will be no problem from anybody – the ruling party gets money, the opposition party gets money. And it is not only once; every time there is an election they are saying that we have to give at least two hundred and fifty thousand dollars to each party.
And these people teach about morality, purity, character – and this is their character.
It has been a good round. I have just sent Hasya and Jayesh to the last country. I have sent the message to the prime minister: “We were going to bring five billion dollars, but not now. With such a mean-minded prime minister who invites us and then asks for one billion dollars…we are not going to come to your country, we are going somewhere else.”
There is one country left which is a possibility – a one percent possibility; otherwise, we have to go on a liner, an ocean liner. And that will be a clear-cut condemnation of the whole earth and all these nations. If a man speaks the truth, he has no place on the earth…he has to live on the ocean.
We will be bringing the biggest ocean liner so at least five thousand people can be on it. My only worry is that these mean politicians and religious leaders may start – and it has never been done – to make laws that our ocean liner cannot stop at their ports. If they can make laws that my airplane cannot land at their airports, they can make laws that my ocean liner cannot come to their ports.
But that too…it will be good for the whole world to see their real faces, that they can kill five thousand people, let them go hungry, without water, without food…. They are talking about loving your enemy and they are talking about beautiful things – and their behavior is simply disgusting.

Osho,
In an American magazine article, Mother Teresa is described as a rebel in the male-dominated hierarchy of the Catholic establishment. If Mother Teresa is regarded as being on a par with someone like Joan of Arc, God help the Catholic church!
The person who has described Mother Teresa as a rebel does not know the meaning of the word. She is a slave in the male-dominated Catholic hierarchy. She is no one. No woman has ever been a pope and no woman ever will be.
And what kind of rebel is she? – she kneels down before Pope the Polack and kisses his hand. This is rebellion? And she goes on supplying more orphans to the Catholics to increase their population…because population is a great factor in politics, so much so that nobody looks at the whole world.
Just the other day I saw that because Mohammedans produce more children – naturally, because they can marry four wives – Israel is very worried. The Mohammedan ocean all around is becoming bigger. So, Israel is perhaps the only country now in the world whose government is giving incentives to produce more children, saying that everybody should have at least four children. They are not concerned about the world, that the population is already too much. Their only concern is with their local politics, that Mohammedans should not become too many, and Jews, in number, too small.
There is a politics of population. The Catholic church has more than seven hundred and fifty million people in the world – the biggest single block as far as religions are concerned. And Mother Teresa is praised, not because she is a rebel but because she is a servile person who is simply bringing more and more orphans into the Catholic church, converting poor Indians to the Catholic religion. So the pope blesses her.
I would have accepted the description if the pope had knelt before Mother Teresa and kissed her hand; then it would have meant something, that the Catholic, male-oriented hierarchy accepts Mother Teresa as being higher than the pope. But she is simply an instrument in the hands of the male-dominated church. She has no position. But because she has been helping the population to grow so much, they arrange a Nobel Prize for her, they arrange other awards, doctorates for her. Don’t be befooled by these things; these are just toys, and all are political.
One of my sannyasins, an economist from England, got a Nobel Prize. Our sannyasins told him, “You are now a Nobel Prize winner…nobody has contributed so much to modern insights into human relationships, the human revolution, as Osho. You should try for a Nobel Prize for him.”
He said, “Do you think I have not tried? In fact, I tried so much that I said, ‘Don’t give it to me; I am his disciple. Let this Nobel Prize be given to Osho.’ But his name, just his name is enough to shock everybody. There was a pin-drop silence in the committee, and my friends suggested, ‘Don’t mention that name in the committee again. It has nothing to do with what a person has contributed or is contributing – it is all politics. And unless there is political support, it is impossible to get a Nobel Prize.’”
I informed the sannyasins: “You tell him to tell the committee that even if they want to give me a Nobel Prize, I will reject it because I know it is all a political drama. And I don’t want to be categorized with Mother Teresa and all kinds of fools.”
In fact, Mother Teresa is against women’s liberation, so whoever has written the article is either ignorant or trying to praise Mother Teresa. And there is a political motive behind it: she is against women’s liberation for the simple reason that she is against birth control. She is against the pill, and the pill is the greatest possibility for women to be liberated from men; otherwise, women will always remain dependent, slaves.
If you follow Mother Teresa’s ideas, then a woman will have child after child, a woman will remain only a mother, continually pregnant. Her whole life will be wasted in producing children, bringing up children. She cannot be economically independent, she cannot be educated, she cannot stand in any field with man as a competitor.
The pill can create the situation where the woman is equal to the man, because the pill makes her free from constant pregnancy, it makes her free from dependence. She can be economically free, financially free, and ultimately she can demand that marriage not be needed: “If we love, we are together; if we don’t love, we say goodbye to each other – in good faith.” There is no question of any fight.
So whoever calls Mother Teresa a rebel is just an idiot. She is one of the persons in the world who is the most reactionary.
Rebellion needs real guts.
She is traditional, orthodox, conventional…a believer in the virgin birth of Jesus Christ, a believer in the miracles of Jesus Christ, a believer in the resurrection of Jesus Christ, a believer that Christianity is the highest religion, a believer that only one who is Christian will be saved – and you call this woman a rebel?
Then who am I?

Osho,
Sitting in the dark I become lighter and lighter, emptier and emptier, like a soap bubble bouncing on the grass. And a giggle arises from my belly to play with the soap bubble, and I feel possessed. I am so happy to be with you. Osho, when I took sannyas you taught me how to feel possessed, and this was the greatest gift of my life. And yet after it happened a few times, I remembered that it used to happen often when I was a kid, at night, lying in my bed. Is that what you mean when you said that you are giving us back what we always had?
Right…absolutely right!

============================================================

Osho,
A couple of years ago, Alvin Toffler wrote a book called Future Shock. In it he described how the world around us is changing faster than ever before. And not only that: the rate of change is increasing all the time. He describes how half of all Americans change homes at least every five years; how people change husbands, wives, jobs, cities and careers with increasing rapidity…Not to mention all the trivial proprietary products from cars to soap powder that change with bewildering frequency.
He also outlines the enormous increase in information, scientific and otherwise. Human knowledge is said to double every ten years, and the doubling time is getting shorter all the time. Compared with the relatively unchanging world of our parents and grandparents, this is a new phenomenon indeed. In the old days they said that a sense of stability was necessary for a normal development and the avoidance of mental illness. This stability has clearly gone forever. Even if we avoid any of several catastrophes looming before mankind, it seems this rapidly changing world is only going to be healthily populated by meditators – the only people who will be able to live joyously in the center of the cyclone.
Would you please comment?
Alvin Toffler’s book is already out-of-date. He writes that in America people change things within five years. Now the time is three years: within three years’ time they change their jobs, their spouses, their cities – not to mention small things which are changing every day. The rate of knowledge, according to him, is doubling every ten years; now it is doubling every five years.
It is true that in the past there was stability. But it is not true that stability is a basic necessity for normal growth of human beings. Stability is good only for the mediocre, only for the retarded – because the mediocre and the retarded never want any change, because any change is a trouble. They would have to learn things again, and learning is their difficulty.
So in the past the world was very good, very convenient for the mediocre people; whatever you learned in your childhood remained true till you died. No change in anything kept the mediocre mind very comfortable.
The new phenomenon is really dangerous, but not for humanity as such; it is only dangerous for the masses, because they cannot keep pace with the change. Before they can become accustomed to one thing, it is already changing. They are always left behind. They can go insane, become abnormal.
But for the intelligent people the changing world is the right world – because intelligence wants new excitements, new challenges, new ecstasies. In the old world there was no possibility.
So I will not agree with Alvin Toffler; he is thinking of humanity as a whole. But this is not a truth; humanity is divided between those who want to remain confined in the familiar and those who want new skies, new stars to explore.
The past was very dangerous for these people – the explorers. The past was against them. In fact, many things were invented in the past, but they were suppressed in favor of the masses. They were dangerous because they bring changes – and the larger part of humanity is more afraid of change than of death, because death is a release, a deep sleep, but a change is a trouble.
Three thousand years ago China developed printing presses. But they never used them widely; they were used only for the royal families. The ordinary masses continued to write their books with their own hands. It was thought that it would be dangerous to give the printing press – a very innocent invention – to the masses, because then there would be so many books available that the mediocre mind wouldn’t be able to cope with it; it would go berserk. To avoid that, printing presses remained suppressed.
Gunpowder was discovered two thousand years ago. But it was never used in war for the simple reason that the soldier is the most retarded person in society. He needs to be retarded; it is society’s demand that he should be retarded. His training is for remaining mediocre so that he never doubts anything, he never questions anything, he never says no to anything. He has no mind of his own. Orders come from above, and he simply follows.
He was accustomed to the old strategy of war; he was trained for archery and other things. Now gunpowder will be so new to him that he may not be able to use it, or he will use it wrongly. It is better to leave him alone; he is doing perfectly well with his archery….
In India it was discovered almost five thousand years ago that the elephant, in comparison to the horse, is not the right vehicle as far as war is concerned, because the horse has more mobility, quickness.
The elephant cannot move as quickly, cannot change positions as quickly. And the most dangerous thing about the elephant is that if a few elephants become afraid, then those who are in front start running over their own army. Horses never do that; horses are far more intelligent. And even if they would, it is not going to kill people. But when elephants run over people, they are finished.
And elephants are accustomed to a certain kind of warfare. For example, for archery they were ready – but not for gunpowder. When the enemy brought guns, they freaked out; they could not understand what was happening. And then they turned back and ran over their own army, killing their own people. Defeat happened again and again in India because of the elephants.
Indians knew that horses were better, but to introduce anything new was against the old mind. The elephant has a prestige, an old and long prestige, and people were trained how to use the elephant, which is not the same as using a horse.
The elephant’s skin is so thick that to move him or to change him or to turn him, you have to use a certain kind of spear; only the spear can make him change his route or movement. Whips won’t do; they won’t reach him. His skin is so thick, and he is bulky. They are good for a royal parade but not good for fighting, where you need more agile, quick movements.
A good horse is one that moves even by the shadow of the whip; you need not hit him.
The whole training was going to be changed…so knowingly they continued with the elephants and went on being defeated by each invader. But they would not change their way of life.
It was comfortable, because everything was static. Whatever your father told you was always right, and that was what his father had told him. Generation after generation the same thing was said; naturally it was bound to be true. So many people cannot be deceived for so long…somebody must have found the fault.
So belief was the basis of the old society, and it worked.
The new world is not for the mediocre.
Toffler is not clear about the distinction – that human beings are not equal. Economically they can be made equal, politically they can be given equal freedom – equal freedom of expression – but what they will express will show you that they are different, what they will do with their freedom will show you that they are different, how they will use their equality will make it clear to you that they are unequal.
So he takes the humanity as a whole; that’s where he goes wrong in his analysis.
The old society was sane for the mediocre and insane for the intelligent – because for the intelligent there was no scope. You were not allowed to invent anything: “God has made everything. Whatever is needed has already been created by God.”
A preacher in a church was giving a sermon and saying, “Everything that is needed is created by God.”
One little boy had come with his father. He stood up and said, “What about railway trains? He did not create them, and they are needed. You yourself have traveled by railway train to come to the church. We have traveled, to come to the church, in a railway train. What about railway trains?”
The priest was shocked for a moment. Then he looked into the Bible and there is a sentence: “God created all things that creep.” He said, “It is written clearly that all things that creep, God created. Everything is not noted down, but trains are creepers. This sentence is enough proof that God created the railway trains.”
But it has to be God who created everything. Man was not allowed.
So it was very sane for the mediocre, for the stupid. They enjoyed it. And nobody could say to them that they are mediocre, they are stupid, because there was no difference between them and the intelligent and the genius.
Today you can see the gap.
So for the genius, the modern world of constant change is just what he has been waiting for for millennia. But to the mediocre, it is very difficult – he cannot exist, things are changing so fast, he feels lost.
For example, in the past there was no divorce; marriage was permanent. Once you got married, there was no way of going back; you were married for your whole life. Even the question was irrelevant.
In the countries which are still living in the past…for example in India, in the villages nobody ever thinks of divorce. The word is never used, although the constitution allows it. But divorce happens only in a very small minority of educated people who are confined only to the big cities like Bombay, Calcutta, Madras, Delhi. The rest of India knows nothing of it.
It was convenient for the mediocre to have one husband, to have one wife, to know each other, to know each other’s habits, to get adjusted to each other. It may be miserable; it does not matter. But at least it was stable and it was good for the children, it was good for the society – because it gives stability to society’s traditions, conventions.
But for a man who really loves, it was not a sane society – because love changes; nothing can be done about it. Just as we accept every other change in the world…. Seasons change – what can you do about it? Summer comes, rains come, winter comes – what can you do about it? Day changes into night, youth changes into old age…the whole existence is changing.
Against this changing world we created a fake society which was stable. It was against existence.
In existence everything is momentary, and we were trying to create something permanent. To the mediocre it brought great happiness, because once something is settled it is settled forever. But to those who are not just looking for a wife to take care of their children, for a wife who is going to be a factory for producing children, for a wife who will take care of the household affairs, it was not very sane. Those people suffered.
Those who are looking for a woman as a human being, those who are looking for love, they have to accept that love can change. It is a reality; it is not an artifact made by society.
It is a flower that blossoms in the morning, and by the evening it is gone. It is not something plastic.
Those who are looking for the real flower and its fragrance and its aliveness have to accept that change is the law of life – the only law.
It means that the new changing society gives opportunity to authentic, sincere, intelligent people. They can live together, if they feel like living together, or they can separate.
It does not create insanity; it is really the sanest thing to do. If the love disappears, then what is the point of living together? Why pretend? Why go on saying false things to each other? – “I love you.”
Dale Carnegie suggests in his book, How To Win Friends and Influence People, that every husband at least three times a day should say to his wife, “I love you.” Whether you feel it or not is not the point; it has to be repeated mechanically. Whenever you have a chance to repeat it, repeat it.
But no intelligent person can do that.
All these kinds of advisers are making man phony. And in America there are thousands of books of this type which make man phony.
I have heard that Henry Ford was in a bookstore looking through the new publications, and Napoleon Hill…he writes well, impressively, but all phony stuff. In his book Think and Grow Rich – a best seller – he proposes that if you visualize that you are rich, you will be rich. Your visualization will sooner or later become a reality. You remain poor because you cannot visualize. So learn how to think and grow rich, and nothing else has to be done. You just have to close your eyes and think persistently, visualizing a Cadillac, and one day suddenly it appears on your porch.
His book had just come out of the press, and he was selling them there with his signature. He was very happy that Henry Ford was there. So he said, “I would like to present one of my books to you.”
Henry Ford looked at the title, Think and Grow Rich, and he knew that to grow rich is an arduous job; it is not just how you think. He said, “I will accept your book after a little inquiry. Have you come here on a public bus or in your private car?”
He said, “On a public bus.”
Henry Ford said, “That’s enough. Keep your book. First visualize yourself into a private car. The day your visualization materializes, bring your book to me. And I don’t need it; I am Henry Ford. I have more riches than you can visualize, and I don’t think I need any more. So give it to someone else.”
But how beautifully he refuted the man – that you have come on a public transport bus, you don’t even have your own private car, and you dare to write a book that says that just by thinking, visualizing, continually visualizing, things can be materialized.
Now, however many times you may repeat it, if love has disappeared it is not going to come. It had never come because of you. It was not something you had done. It happened; it came and it possessed you. And one day you find it is no more there. It was not your doing, so you cannot do anything to prevent it from going.
So for the intelligent person it is perfectly good that things are changing fast. He will be constantly thrilled by the change.
Now, doing the same job all your life you become a robot; you start doing the job mechanically. There is no need to think about it.
In the body there is a robot part. First you think something, practice something, and then it is transferred to the robot part. In Gurdjieff’s system, that robot part plays a very important role.
You can see it. If you are learning to drive a car, it is very difficult in the beginning…it is almost impossible. You have to look ahead on the road, so that you do not crash and kill somebody. You have to stay on the right side, so you have to be constantly aware of the steering wheel. You have to stay within a certain limit of speed, so you have to be aware of the speed you are going. And your foot has to be in tune with you on the accelerator. And you have to be constantly aware of the brake, because at any moment anything can happen and you have to brake.
So many things…and in a crazy traffic, which is going all over. If you look at the brake, you forget that you have to look ahead. You are not to look at the brake; your foot has to do the work.
It seems impossible. Things are being asked, so many things together. If you manage one, the other goes off; if you manage the other, something else goes off.
But through a little practice, the whole learning is transferred to the robot part. Then you can sing, you can smoke, you can listen to the radio, you can talk to your friend, you can do anything…and your body itself takes care of the vehicle. You need not pay any more attention; it is now all automatic. Not only is the car automatic, you are automatic.
The mediocre person finds that once you become automatic in anything, it is good to remain in it. Learning again a new job, learning again a new wife…you knew perfectly well your old wife; good or bad or whatsoever she was, you knew her. Now this is something unknown. And what she will do with you, you don’t know. A new job means new learning, a new city means finding a new friends, finding a new society.
But, if every three years you have to go on changing, your life will remain sharpened; more and more rich it will become.
So I don’t see the speed of change as a danger to the genius. And the whole progress of humanity depends on the genius; the masses have never done anything as far as progress or evolution is concerned.
So Toffler is unnecessarily worried…unless he himself belongs to the mediocre. And it seems he belongs; otherwise, it would have been clear to him that we have come to a world where everybody has to sharpen his intelligence just to survive. Even the mediocre person has the potential, but he has not made any effort. But if the world is changing he will have to make the effort.
I can see the difference…. In India, any young man – if he is educated – knows only geography, history, mathematics…but he does not know carpentry, he does not know music, he does not know cooking, he does not know anything else.
While in the West the same young man of the same age knows many more things, because the Western youth has to prepare himself for a world which you cannot take for granted. Today it may be possible that you can be musician; tomorrow it may not be possible, and you have to be a carpenter or a plumber or a cook. It is richer.
For example, the way we created the commune in America…. We cannot create that kind of commune in India, because either you will get absolutely uneducated, unskilled people, who cannot do anything unless supervised, ordered, told, continually reminded – and then, too, it will not be a piece of beautiful art, it will be a hatchet job – or you will get those who are educated, who cannot do even that. They will say, “We can do geography, we can do history, we can tell you when Socrates was married, and we can tell you when he was poisoned – on what date and at what time.”
But that is not needed to create a commune. They cannot make a house, they cannot make a road, they cannot make a dam, they cannot plant trees. They are very poor in that way. Their only capacity is to be a clerk.
It is such a difficult thing because India is still living in the stable past, where things have always remained the same.
This whirlwind that has arisen in the West is of tremendous importance. It is not a crisis, it is a critical moment. It is a great chance for the talented, and also an opportunity, for those who have lived up to now a stable life, to learn something from a changing pattern. It will not make them poorer, it will make them richer. A man should be able to do many things, and that is possible only if he goes on moving from job to job.
Ludwig Wittgenstein, one of the most important philosophers, refused a post as a professor in Oxford because he just wanted to be a teacher in a school. A professor he had been. So he said, “I know that I would like to know something new – how to deal with small children.” He was not concerned about the salary, he was more concerned about his own learning. And finally he dropped the school and became a fisherman.
Now this is impossible in India, that anybody could drop from professor to teacher, and then from teacher to fisherman. People would think, “What kind of progress is happening?” But I say that it is progress, because this man knows three jobs and he is enriched because of his many activities.
A man loves a woman or a woman loves a man – it is good as far as it goes, but it should not be stretched when it is no more there. Then it is better to change partners, because each new woman and each new man are going to be different and will bring to your life a new aspect, a new revelation.
People who have changed their lovers many times are immensely enriched because no two lovers are the same. And this should be the criterion for everything.
There is no danger in this changing world that is opening up. It has already come in. And the speed will go on becoming faster and faster – so you have to learn how to adjust yourself quickly to a new situation. That will give you a flexibility, that will make you more alive. You will have to find ways that you have never tried before, because situations have changed.
And if you are going to change continually you will live, in one life, a thousand lives, and your life will become, not a stale repetition of the same from birth to death, but every day a new sunrise and every day a new flower blossoming in your garden. So to me, it is not something bad.
It is going to be difficult for the mediocre, but they have lived in safety for millions of years. It is time they should be shaken and awakened.
And they have ruled over the intelligent for millions of years. Now it is time they should be put in their right place. Now, one who is capable of adjusting to new modes of living, loving, working, will prove his genius, his talent.
The New Man must be a multidimensional man. And this situation is simply an absolute necessity for the multidimensional man to arrive on the earth.

Osho,
It seems so unfortunate that existence had to give women this thing called menstruation every month. It's one of those things you know is coming, and you know all the emotions and crazy things that follow with it. And yet it is the most difficult thing to be able to watch and not be identified with – at least for me. Funnily enough, even the men seem to get involved and identified with it when we are in it.
How can we watch something that is such an intrinsic part of our biology?
The art of watchfulness is the same whether you are watching something outside of you or you are watching something in your own biology – it is also outside of you.
I know it is difficult, because you are more identified with it; it is so close. But the problem is not watchfulness, the problem is identification. That identification should be broken.
When you feel that your menstruation is coming, try to watch, try to see what it is bringing along with it – anger, depression, hate, a tendency to fight, a desire to throw tantrums. Just watch – and not only watch but say to the man you love, “This is going to come within me. I will try my best to be aware, but if I get identified you need not get involved in it, you can simply watch. You are far away and outside of it.”
And the man can know that a woman in menstruation is in difficulty. She needs your compassion.
And the same should be done by the woman, because you may not know, but man also has his period every month. Because it has no physical expression, for centuries nobody has been aware that man also goes through the same cycle. He has to, because he and she are parts of one whole.
A man also, for four or five days each month, goes into a dark hole. you can at least throw the whole responsibility on your menstruation. He cannot even do that because his menstruation is only emotional – he passes through the same emotions that you pass through. And because there was no physical expression of it, nobody ever thought about it. But now it is an established fact that every month he passes through the same situation as you. So he is not superior in that way, and you are not unfortunate in comparison to him.
The difficulty arises, that when you love a man and you live with him long enough, slowly, slowly your body rhythms become very, very harmonious. So when you have your menstruation, he also has his menstruation. That creates the real trouble – both of you are in a dark hole, both are depressed, both are sad, both are in despair. And you throw the responsibility on each other.
So the man has to find out when he has his period. And the way to find out is to just write down in your diary, every day, how it is. And you will find a block of five days when you were continuously in depression, in a bad mood, ready to fight. Watching for two to three months – noting in your diary – you will come to an absolute conclusion: these are the five days. Make your woman aware: “These are my five days.”
If they are different from your woman’s, it is good, fortunate, because the trouble will be only half. So, the man can watch when the woman throws tantrums and does all kinds of stupid things. He need not participate, he need not answer, he need not react. He should play cool and give the woman a chance to see that he is playing cool, which means “I should be aware.”
But if these periods coincide, then there is a real calamity. But then, too, you both can be aware. You can see that he is also suffering from his menstrual period and it is not good to throw anything more upon the poor fellow, and he can understand that you are suffering and “It is good to keep my load on myself.”
Just be watchful.
Soon there will be a possibility…. It was really the religions of the world who have been preventing it; otherwise, the menstrual period can disappear – and from women more easily than from men.
If you are on the pill, perhaps it may disappear. To most women the pill is a perfect thing – the period disappears. So there is no harm; be on the pill.
And just a few days ago I heard they have discovered a pill for the man too, so he can also take his pill.
But that will only change your biological situation. What is more important is to be aware. If you can be aware of the situation and not get identified, that will be far more significant.
But the pill will take away your physical pain. And I am perfectly in favor of that. There is no need to suffer any physical pain unnecessarily – if it can be alleviated. So find a pill and forget about the physical, the biological suffering.
And the man should also do the same, because he goes through the same period. It’s just that the poor fellow has not been aware of it for millions of years because there is no physical expression of it. But there is psychological expression, and it is exactly the same.
So first, find out when the period is. And if the pill is now available in the market for the man too, he should also take the pill.
And awareness you can practice in a thousand other ways. There is no need to suffer bodily, physical pain unnecessarily. Certainly the pill can stop your period; it can also stop the possibility of your getting pregnant – which is a blessing, because the world does not need any more population.
But meanwhile, try awareness.

Osho,
When I became a sannyasin I started feeling, much more, that existence is taking care of me. Is my whole life being taken care of by existence? And if it is, how is it that I feel it more since I have been with you?
Existence is taking care of your whole life, because you are part of it. Being with me, it is not taking more care than before, it is just that you have become more aware of it; you were not aware at all before.
The change has happened in your awareness. It is not that existence has started taking more care, but now you can feel it, be aware of it.

(There is a loud noise from another room.)

Is somebody suffering from a menstrual period upstairs?…
Whether you know it or not, existence goes on taking care of you.
If you know it, you feel grateful.
In your gratefulness is your religiousness.
In your gratefulness is your awakening.
But the care is the same. It cares for the smallest blade of grass just as it cares for the biggest star. But those poor fellows cannot be aware of it. You are fortunate: you can be aware of it.
Awareness will create a new situation in you – that of gratitude. And to me gratitude is the only religiousness there is.

Osho,
You mentioned the meditation of staring for one hour into the mirror. Is it good to look with a soft, unfocused gaze, rather than to stare? Also, is it better to look into either the left or the right eye, or at both? On another occasion, you suggested that couples could look into each other's eyes. My questions for the first meditation also apply to this method. Would you please comment?
It is best to look in the mirror, not in the eyes of your lover – because in the eyes of your lover you can get identified. With the mirror, there is no such possibility.
Staring is not good – it will be tiring and tense. So, a soft gaze…and not in one eye but in both eyes…a very soft gaze, without any tension, just looking for no reason at all. In staring you may stop blinking, but in soft gaze you can continue blinking; there is no harm.
Remain as relaxed as possible.

============================================================

Osho,
When you spoke about devotees I was very deeply touched because that is what I feel for you: devotion. If the price of enlightenment were to stay away from your presence, I would give it up gladly for the bliss and centeredness I feel right now just looking into your eyes.
It happens to me several times during discourse: looking at you, suddenly time and movement stop. And with this phenomenon I feel a rush of almost tangible love-energy entering my body with such strength that a few times I literally feel my body pushed back by it.
I love you, and I hope I never have to leave for as long as you live.
These moments of devotion, of love, are the moments of enlightenment – just glimpses…as if you see, from a faraway place, the sunlit peak of a mountain. Although you are still far away, this is the peak where one day you have to arrive.
You don’t have to go away from me, so there is no question of any conflict between being with me and seeking and searching for enlightenment. You are with me for enlightenment; otherwise, there is no purpose in being with me. The only purpose is to have a little feeling of that great experience, because without this little feeling the word enlightenment remains empty for you.
These small moments will start filling the word enlightenment with meaning, with a certainty, with a guarantee that it is not just a word but a reality to be realized; that just by being in the presence of a man who has found it, you can be touched by its reality. Time can stop, and for a moment you are transported to another level of existence, where in a sense you are, and in a sense you are no more – and both are true at the same time.
Enlightenment is not something philosophical, it is very existential. It is something to live, something to be, something to experience, something to share. It is almost tangible.
Looking into my eyes, you are looking into your own silence. Your eyes also have the same silence – you have never allowed it to happen.
Being in deep devotion comes as a surprise the first time, because it is so difficult for people to feel even love, and devotion is the highest form of love…just the essential fragrance of love. If love is the flower, then devotion is just the fragrance. You cannot catch hold of it. You can feel it, you can smell it, you can be surrounded by it, you can be drowned in it, but you cannot catch hold of it. It is not that material.
If these moments are happening to you, you are on the right path. There is nowhere to go, no need to go. You have found the place from where the pilgrimage begins – it has already begun. You should feel blessed by it.
Otherwise, people are simply wandering into words, theories, philosophies, theologies, religions, and all kinds of gymnastics of the mind; and nobody bothers that the ultimate reality is beyond mind. You can go on for lives searching into the mind and you will not find anything except empty words. Mind is a desert where nothing grows.
But if you can move just a little above the mind, the whole sky opens up for you…a little courage, and you can open your wings.
To be with the master is simply to see someone who has opened his wings and is on the wing in the sky. And he reminds you – not only by his words, but by his very being – that the same is possible for you, that you have wings but you have forgotten it. You don’t have to achieve anything, you only have to remember. And these moments, by and by, push you to that remembrance.
That remembrance is freedom from all cults, from all beliefs, freedom from all kinds of stupidities, superstitions. And not only freedom from…. Remember this: freedom from superstitions is good but not enough, freedom from beliefs is good but not enough. Freedom for truth…freedom from beliefs and freedom for truth; freedom from superstitions and freedom for reality. When freedom comes with both wings – from and for – you are coming back home.

Osho,
Years ago during a psychosynthesis workshop, when we were in a hypnotic state the leader took us through Plato's allegory of the cave, where the men were standing by the fire looking at the shadows on the wall, never having seen the opening of the cave.
This left a deep impression on me, and I would be so grateful to hear you speak on this.
Plato’s allegory is of slaves who, working in a cave, see only their shadows on the walls and believe that what is happening on the walls is the only reality. They don’t know of any other reality except those shadows…they don’t even know that those shadows are their own. They know nothing about the outside world, outside their cave; it doesn’t exist for them.
This is one of the most beautiful allegories – of tremendous importance. It is our allegory. Translated into our life, it means we are living in a certain cave and we are seeing shadows on a certain screen and we know nothing else about the screen. We know nothing about there being a world beyond the screen; we know nothing about these shadows on the screen, even that they are our own.
Looked at rightly, it is the allegory of our mind.
What do you know of the world? Just a small skull is your cave; and just the screen of your mind…and the things which you call thoughts, emotions, sentiments, feelings, are all shadows – they don’t have any substance in them.
And you get angry, you get depressed, you are in anguish – because you have learned to be identified with those shadows. You are projecting them; they are your own shadows. It is your own anger that is projected on the screen of the mind. And then it becomes a vicious circle: that anger makes you more angry, more anger projects more anger, and so on and so forth. And we go on living our whole life without ever thinking that there is a world of reality beyond the mind, on the outside, and there is also a world of reality beyond all these sentiments, feelings, emotions – beyond your ego. That is your awareness.
The whole art of meditation is to bring you out of the cave so that you can become aware that you are not those shadows but that you are a watcher.
And the moment you become a watcher, a miracle happens: those shadows start disappearing. They feed on your identity; if you feel identified with them, then they are there. The more you identify with them, the more nourished they are.
When you are just a watcher – just seeing, not judging, not condemning – slowly, slowly those shadows disappear, because now they don’t have any food. And then there is such a tremendous clarity, perceptivity, that you can see the world beyond – the world of sunrise and the world of clouds and the world of the stars; that is your outside. And you can become aware of your inside, which is far more mysterious.
The outside world is so beautiful, but the inside world is a thousandfold more beautiful.
Once you are somehow capable of getting out of the cave you become part of a universal consciousness. Inside, you have the whole eternity; you have been here forever and you will be here forever. Death has never happened and cannot happen. And outside there is a tremendously beautiful existence.
And now to call them “outside” and “inside” is not right; those are the old words when the skull was dividing them in two. Now it is one. Your consciousness and the beauty of a sunset and the beauty of a starry night, your consciousness and the freshness of a rose – they are no longer separate because the principle of separation is no longer there. It is all one cosmic whole.
And I call this experience the only holy experience. To experience the whole is the only holy experience. It has nothing to do with churches, temples, synagogues; it has something to do with you coming out, slipping out of the clutches of the mind. And it is not difficult, it is just that you have not tried it.
One Japanese professor has been training small children to swim. His idea has been that in the mother’s womb the child is in a certain liquid which is exactly the same as the ocean water, with the same constituents. And the child floats in that water.
It is well-known that whenever a woman becomes pregnant, she starts eating more salty food. She needs more salt because the child needs ocean water. And this has given the idea to the evolutionists that man must have first been born in water. And if you look at the child’s growing stages – in a photograph every day for nine months – you will be surprised: he begins by being a fish.
In the Hindu religion God’s first incarnation is a fish. It cannot be coincidental, because even to conceive of God as a fish would have looked condemnatory. But for thousands of years Hindus have believed that God originated first as a fish. And to them God is life; they are just different words.
This Japanese professor thought that if life was first born in water, then swimming should be intrinsic; it has not to be learned. To prove his point he started working with small babies, and he has been immensely successful. Six-month-old babies can swim. And now he is trying with three-month-old babies – and they are swimming. And his expectation is that one day he will be able to show to the world that the just-born baby can be put in a tub of water and he will be swimming.
Swimming is not an art which has to be learned, it is something that we already know. But how many people know swimming? – Not very many people. Although it is something intrinsic we have the capacity to ignore it, to forget it.
The English word sin is very beautiful. I love it because its original meaning is forgetfulness. It has nothing to do with the crimes we call sin. It is concerned with only one crime, and that is forgetfulness. We have forgotten ourselves; the remedy is remembrance.
Plato’s allegory rightly depicts the situation which we are in. But Plato never went further than that. Plato himself was never a meditator; the allegory remained a philosophical idea.
If he had interpreted this allegory and had given it a turn towards meditation, the whole Western mind would have been different. This allegory would have changed the whole Western mind and the history that followed Plato – because Plato is the founder of the whole Western mind.
Socrates never wrote anything; he was Plato’s master. Whatever we have about Socrates is from Plato’s notes of him talking with others – the famous Socratic dialogues. As a student he was just taking notes on them. Those notes have survived. In those notes is this allegory.
It is difficult to know for what purpose Socrates was using the allegory, but it is certain that Plato misused it – he was not a man who was in search of truth, he was a man who wanted to think about truth. But to search for truth is one thing and to think about truth is totally different: thinking keeps you within the cave. It is only non-thinking that can take you out of the cave.
So be silent, be still, whenever you can find the time. Allow silence to settle in you like a lake, so silent that there is not even a ripple – no thought in your mind – and suddenly you are out of it. And only then will you understand that the allegory is not for philosophical purposes; it is for authentic search, it is for realization.
Plato never gave that interpretation. So the whole Western mind followed Plato – he was a genius – and philosophy remained only a thinking about truth.
What can you think about truth? Either you know it or you don’t know it. Sometimes even geniuses can do such stupid things that it looks unbelievable. How can you think about truth? – It is almost like a blind man thinking about light. What can he think about light? – he does not even know darkness.
Ordinarily, people think that blind people are living in darkness. You are wrong, because to see darkness you need eyes – as much as you need them for light. So don’t be in a misunderstanding. Because you close your eyes and there is darkness, that does not mean that a blind person sees darkness. You see darkness, because you can see light and you can see its absence. The blind man cannot see light, so he cannot see its absence. What can he think about light? And whatever he thinks is going to be wrong. He needs not a philosopher but a physician.
And Gautam Buddha has actually said, “I am not a philosopher, I am a physician. I don’t want you to become great thinkers, I want you to become great seers.”
And if you can see, then it is not a question of thinking; you simply know it. And the way to see is to learn the simple art of non-thinking.
In the beginning it will be difficult because you have become so accustomed to it. It has become such an old habit that it goes on by itself; it has its own momentum. Even if you don’t want to think, it goes on and on. But if you are a little patient and you just watch the mind going on with its routine, without giving it any energy anymore, just seeing it as if you are seeing a film on a screen, remaining aloof, alert, watchful, without getting identified – soon the mind disappears.
And the disappearance of the mind is your coming out of the cave. For the first time you see the world that is surrounding you – its beauty, its tremendous silence. And you can see your own being – its immense light, its great blessings, its ultimate benediction.

Osho,
From early childhood until my first few years as a sannyasin, an experience of expansion would happen: my head would fill the whole room, and later on it would fill the house and then move outside the house and surround it.
This has not happened for a few years, and although it does not feel like a loss, I wonder why it stopped and what it was.
If every person were to remember his experiences which were extraordinary…you would be surprised to know that by just finding those experiences, you would be able to find all the methods that have been developed for transforming man.
This is one of the old methods; it is greatly helpful. Just feeling that your head is becoming bigger and bigger, that you are not in the room but the room is within you…and then your head goes on becoming bigger and bigger. And the garden outside is not outside you but inside you, and the moon and the sun and the stars are not outside you but everything is inside your head, and your head becomes the circumference of the whole existence…. It is imagination; it is not that it is really happening.
But the very imagination gives you a key, and that key is: your mind is your servant. You can make it do things – and it is a very obedient servant. But for your whole life you have listened to it as if it is the master.
These experiments will give you the idea – the most important idea – that you are the master; the mind has to do anything you want it to do.
And also, while you are visualizing expansion, thoughts will disappear – because your whole concentration will be on the expansion, on the mind becoming bigger and bigger – and there will be a great silence. In that silence perhaps you may become aware of your awareness – that you are just a watcher, that you are not the mind. The mind can become big, the mind can become small – both exercises are as ancient as man’s search for truth.
Another method is: you start thinking that your mind is becoming smaller, very much smaller. Finally it disappears and you don’t have any head. That, too, is perfectly good. It is not that your head disappears – it will remain where it is – but you will learn one thing: mind is nothing but a faculty of imagination, so through mind you can never achieve reality.
The people who are trying to achieve reality through the mind are simply imagining things. Somebody is seeing Jesus Christ, somebody is seeing Krishna, somebody is seeing Hazrat Mohammed – and they don’t know that this is only their imagination. These people are not there, but their minds are capable of focusing on a certain subject and making it almost appear real. Many religions have been befooled and have been befooling others through such exercises.
I say it is good if these exercises help you to become alert – you are separate and mind is just a game of imagination. But almost all the religions have used these tricks to deceive millions of people. Sitting every day in front of Krishna’s statue, praying, hoping that one day he will appear – and one day Krishna does appear…but it has nothing to do with Krishna. It is your own game; you have played a trick upon yourself. All so-called cults, which depend on prayer, are really based on imagination – and all the religions have done that.
Real religion is to know that your mind is a faculty of imagination. You can create any kind of hallucination you want. If it is something difficult, then there are ways to help, which scriptures have provided. For example, if you fast for twenty-one days, then any hallucination becomes easier, very easy. When you are well fed and healthy, that hallucination will not be easy. Sometimes when you have a fever, lying on your bed, you may see that you are rising up from the bed, or perhaps your whole bed is rising. Beyond a temperature of one hundred and five degrees you start hallucinating all kinds of things.
In isolation hallucination is easy. Go to a mountain cave at night, alone, with all the wild animals. Fear, death, darkness, all force you; your mind is compelled. Whatever you want…if you want to hallucinate that Krishna is with you or Christ is with you, it will be easier than in your own house where your wife is, your children are, the neighbors are. These people – Krishna and Christ and Rama and Zarathustra – are very much afraid of coming; they always come when you are alone and in a faraway place.
It created in all the religions the idea of renouncing the world, because when you renounce the world and go to the mountains, the realization of God is very easy. On the mountain, Sinai, Moses encounters God. Why could he not encounter God with all his fellow Jews? What was the need that he should go alone? At least he should have kept a secretary and a few journalists with him to report to the world what really happened. Now he is the only person; whatever he says you have to believe. All the people who have experiences of God or his incarnations have always done so in privacy. Why don’t these people do it in public? The reason is: when fasting, when in darkness, when in the forest, in the desert alone the mind has more flexibility to imagine; then, you can visualize anything that you want. In that way this kind of experience has been exploited by religions. The people who realize God in this way become saints, great prophets, saviors – and they are really simply victims of hallucinations.
But the method itself can be used for better purposes. If you use it to be aware that you are the master and the mind is only a servant, you can give the orders and it has to follow.
Your experience was good. It stopped because you became grown-up and you must have started thinking to yourself, “This is childish, this is something crazy.” Your rational mind must have been creating antagonism towards it. That’s why it stopped.
If you want it to begin again it can begin very easily, because you have experienced it. You can use it, but use it to remember your mastery, because whatever is happening – either expansion or shrinking – both are imagination; they have nothing to do with reality. But to give you the sense of mastery is great, because that sense can be then used to stop thinking. If you can manage to expand your mind to the very limits of the universe, you can say to the mind, “Now, stop thinking!” and sit silently and let thinking stop.
This was the original purpose for which these kinds of exercises were used – not to help your imagination but to free you from the grip of the mind.

Osho,
What is it about trees that evoke such feelings of the primordial in me?
They are beings of such silence and stillness. They seem to have that dignity which comes with knowing something eternal, and they represent something I feel I must know or once knew. Their appeal is not simply that of the beautiful and graceful; they have such an unobtrusive allurement, the attraction of something fathomless that I do not even feel I need to understand, but long to be enveloped in.
The instinct is to move towards relating to them; and yet to hug or touch a tree doesn't seem to be what it's about at all.
And I know I have often felt of you as a tree, for you bear those same qualities.
Are trees trying to tell us something?
Everything in existence is trying to tell you something – not only trees. The mountains, the ocean, the rivers, the sky, the clouds – everything is telling you something. It is telling you that existence is eternal, that forms change but the essence always remains. So don’t get identified with the form, get in tune with the essence. Your body is your form, your mind is your form; beyond both is your reality. And that reality has everything.
This existence is poor before that inner reality of yours. The tree has many things, the mountain has many things but your inner reality has all those things plus. And this plus point is awareness.
The tree is, but it is not aware that it is. And unless you become aware that you are, you are just a walking tree; you have not evolved. Evolution is trying, through humanity, to reach to the ultimate peak of consciousness.
A few people have reached; they are proof enough that everybody can reach – just a little effort, just a little sincerity, just a little search. Everything is telling you that the way you are living is not enough, the things you are doing are not all. Your mundane life is only the superficial; your real life remains, in most cases, untouched. People are born, they live and they die – and without knowing who they are.
The whole existence is silent. If you can also be silent you will know who this consciousness is within you; and knowing this, life becomes a joy, a moment-to-moment rejoicing, an unending festival of lights.
And then trees will feel jealous of you rather than you feeling jealous of trees – because you can grow flowers of consciousness. Those trees are poor; they are very far back on the way. They are also travelers; some day they will reach where you are today. Some day you must have been in their place.
Gautam Buddha has told many stories of his past lives. One of his stories is that he was an elephant, and once in the middle of the night the forest caught on fire. It was so wild and the wind was so strong and the fire was spreading so fast…all the animals were trying to escape but were not finding the way.
The elephant was tired of running, so he stood under a tree looking all around to see where he could escape. Just as he was about to move – he lifted up one of his legs – at that very moment a small animal came and sat under his foot. His feet were big enough, and the animal must have thought it was a good place for shade. But the elephant was in a difficulty: if he put his foot down the animal would die, and if he did not put his foot down then he would die – because the fire was coming towards him.
But Buddha said that the elephant decided that it didn’t matter: “One day, one has to die, I should not lose this opportunity. If I can save one life…as long as I am alive I will protect this creature.”
It was difficult to stand in that posture for very long. The elephant fell to the side where the fire had moved to. He was burned and he died. But his decision to save some life, his reverence for a small creature was the reason he was born in his next life as a human being.
We are moving; those trees are also moving. It depends on what we do, it depends on what consciousness we live with; that is what takes us to a higher step.
It is beautiful to enjoy the trees, to enjoy the whole existence; but remember, right now you are at the highest peak – and your basic work is not to miss the opportunity of human life but to find the center of your being.
That finding will make you part of the universal soul; then there is no need for any other form. And to have a formless existence is the greatest freedom. Even the body is an imprisonment, the mind is an imprisonment. When you are pure consciousness, one with the whole, your freedom is total – and that is the goal.

Osho,
Recently you mentioned some ancient meditation techniques in relation to some of our childhood experiences. Imagination seems to be the basis of many of these techniques.
What is the difference between imagining one is enlightened and being enlightened?
Milarepa, what is the difference between me and you? That’s exactly the difference between being really enlightened and just imagining to be enlightened!

============================================================

Osho,
To me one of the most tragic falls of man today is his valuing all the wrong things. Somewhere in the collective unconscious there must be some idea of wanting all the most beautiful things of life for free – and paying hugely for all the nonessentials. We worship the words of football players, movie stars and politicians with no appreciation whatsoever for wisdom.
This situation is so pitiful: how can one understand the beauty of cosmic payment circling back to the source when we remain in such poverty?
Would you please bring light to these blocks that man has agreed upon, buried in the unconscious?
The real values are not buried in the unconscious, the real values are revealed when you move above consciousness to the superconsciousness. What is buried in the unconscious is what is making man’s life so stupid: he may pay attention to a football player’s words, an actor’s words, and will not heed the words of the wise.
Unconsciousness is the basement of your mind. In your unconscious many things are buried which find expression through your conscious. For example, millions of people watch boxing or football matches and really get excited and they never think about what they are watching. In boxing they are watching sheer violence, but they enjoy it. This is the expression of hidden violence in you.
Society has managed man with an absolutely wrong strategy. The idea of the society has been that if something is thrown into the basement, into the darkness of the unconscious, you are finished with it. That is not the case. You are not finished with it. It will come up in a different form, and with a vengeance. And it will go on collecting.
A little anger is not much to be worried about; it comes and goes. But if you go on suppressing anger, there comes a point when it becomes like a volcano, which is just going to burst with any excuse.
Throughout the whole history suppression has been the way to keep man civilized. But in fact, it has been the cause of keeping man only superficially civilized – skin-deep civilized. Just scratch anybody a little and you will find the barbarous, the primitive, the animal, all hidden behind.
All your games are in a subtle way about satisfying your desire to win. In the movies you watch violence, you watch murder, you watch rape – and any movie which has no murder, rape, seems to have no appeal. These are essential ingredients which attract humanity, because in the unconscious they are waiting to be satisfied, and this is a vicarious way to satisfy them. You become identified with the murderer or perhaps with the murdered. You become identified with the rapist or with the raped, and a little release happens. That is your joy in watching a movie, reading a novel.
In California, the University of California has continuously for one year been studying the fact that whenever there is a boxing match, crime increases by fourteen percent for the next week, compared to the normal rate. What happens? Things which were hidden… Seeing violence in boxing, your own violence starts coming up, and that violence increases the crime rate by fourteen percent above the normal. For almost one week it remains, and then slowly it goes back down to normal.
Now, the government knows that boxing should be made a crime, something against the law. But it is not being done because boxing earns money for the people who manage it. It earns money for the government, and it seems that anything is legal if it brings money with it.
In the unconscious, the real values are not present because nobody has repressed the real values. Real values don’t need to be repressed because they are not against anybody, they do not do any harm to anybody. They are the qualities of love and compassion. But man has not experienced them because they are above the conscious mind.
You have to go beyond your conscious mind to have some glimpse of the glorious world of real values: truth, sincerity, love, friendliness, compassion, sympathy, sensitivity, appreciation of beauty, grace. All those are lined up waiting for you. But the society has put you in a struggle with the unconscious, forcing all your animal heritage into the unconscious; you have to go on continually forcing it. It is not that once forced, you are finished with it; it goes on coming up, it wants expression.
And you don’t have anything else in your life – creativity of any sort – in which your energy can be involved, so no energy is left for the unconscious to use. So it is a strange situation; all creative dimensions are closed.
The superconscious is not talked about in your educational systems. The only thing talked about is your conscious mind, and that the only way to get any poisonous thing away from you is to throw it into the unconscious.
This whole strategy is wrong. That’s why human society has come to such a wrong situation where people are living, but not truly alive – they are almost like walking corpses. From the cradle to the grave they are simply dying every day, slowly, slowly. It is a long death, a seventy-year long death. It cannot be called life because no flower blossoms, no song arises, no beauty is created.
You do not enrich life. And remember it as a basic dictum: unless you enrich life, you don’t have it. If you have life, you are bound to enrich life; you will leave life better for the world than you found it when you entered into the world. But right now it seems you will leave the world more dark, more gloomy, more sad, more miserable. The old strategy has to be abandoned, absolutely abandoned without any exception.
A few fundamentals have to be remembered. One: the unconscious has no way of releasing any content directly from itself. It has no doors, it is a basement. For anything to go out of it, it first has to come to the conscious mind. The conscious mind is the door.
In the same way the superconscious mind also has no doors. Anything to be expressed has to come to the conscious mind. The conscious mind is your ground floor; only from there can anything go out.
So the first thing is that the unconscious should be emptied. But one becomes afraid of emptying it because it is carrying all kinds of ugly features. How to empty the violence that is there: the anger, the sadness, all kinds of worries that you have dumped there because you could not manage to sort them out? How are you going to bring them to the conscious? And if they come, then what are you going to do with them?
The unconscious is not interested in the object of violence, it is interested only to throw the violence. You can just beat your pillow and you will feel immense relief. It will look a little awkward to you, that you are beating your pillow and the pillow has done no wrong to you. You think yourself very cultured, sophisticated, intelligent – and what are you doing beating the poor pillow which has not done anything? It is not a question of whether the pillow has done anything or not, but beating it will release the violence in you because violence has nothing to do with the object. Whether you beat somebody or you beat the pillow, it makes no difference to it. Whether you kill somebody or you just kill a teddy bear, it doesn’t matter. But killing has to be done.
In many primitive societies even today they make sacrifices to their gods – cows made of mud – and with great celebration. They sacrifice other animals, even men, but they are all made of mud. And the strangest thing about these primitive societies is that there is no violence, people don’t fight, they don’t have the energy to fight. They have killed somebody; the idea to kill is no longer there.
There are societies in the world where even a dream is taken to be true. There is truth to it; Sigmund Freud is proof of it. But those societies have been doing a far better psychoanalysis for thousands of years – and they are poor primitives, they don’t know what they are doing.
If somebody dreams in the night – because those people rarely dream; dreams exist because you have repressed things during the day. You wanted to look at a beautiful woman, but your wife was with you and you could not look at that woman. In the dream that woman will appear.
In those primitive societies there is no suppressive system. If somebody likes someone, he goes to the person and says, “You are beautiful and I like you very much.” The person may even be a stranger. But if somebody dreams, the first thing that happens is that the elders of the society gather, and he has to confess his dream to them.
It is a great thing that somebody has dreamed. If he has dreamed that he has insulted somebody, then he has to go to that person to apologize and bring sweets and fruits to present to him as a token of friendship because in the dream he had insulted him.
To us it will look absolutely absurd because what you do in the dream is your business; the other person does not know that you insulted him. That is not the question, that the other person does not know; the question is that you have a certain antagonism towards the person that came up in your dream, and it is better to make things clear. Go to the person to apologize, give him presents and the dream will never come again.

A king of Egypt had ordered his court and the whole kingdom that if anybody comes in his dream then death is the penalty. Now this is real absurdity. People were so afraid – but what can you do if you appear in his dream? That is really his problem; you have not gone into his dream. And he killed a few people because in spite of the warning, he saw them in his dream. Why should they disturb his sleep? And he was a monarch with all the powers over life and death; he killed people.
The whole kingdom was afraid that at any moment they could be killed for no crime. And they had nothing to do with his dream. His dream is his dream, it is his problem. But who was going to say this to him?

These primitive people are far more intelligent, far more innocent. This society – where dreams are taken as if they are real, and something has to be done consciously so that an ugly dream does not come to you and destroy your dignity – has never had any war in its whole history. Their small tribes have never fought with each other; there is no violence in that sense.
Nobody fights with anyone. If, even in a dream somebody insults you or you insult somebody, it has to be settled consciously, then it is impossible to have any violence. People are utterly simple.
The unconscious simply needs fake objects to throw its garbage at. There is no need to kill anybody: you can kill a statue, you can kill a photograph, you can burn a photograph and feel at ease. And slowly, slowly, whatever comes in your dreams or in your waking hours from the unconscious, give it a reality so that it goes out. Don’t repress it. Don’t think, “This is bad and I should not show it to anybody;” it will become a wound and finally a cancer. Release it.
In your private room you can release it in any way you want. Dynamic meditation was basically devised to help the unconscious unburden itself. The Indonesian latihan does the same.
Once the unconscious is completely clean and there is no energy wasted in repressing it, the same energy starts moving upwards because remember, that energy cannot remain static, it has to move. Now that there is no work in the unconscious, it starts moving upwards towards lighter spaces in you, and there you will find real values which make a man a man and take him beyond the animal.
Whatever you experience in the superconscious has also to be brought to the conscious and acted upon. Don’t just think great thoughts, don’t just go on experiencing beauty – let your experiences become actions, creativity. Do something about them, and as you start doing something about them you will find that deeper qualities are pouring in.
Just writing a poem may release a great source of energy. Doing any beautiful act, doing any compassionate act, sharing something that you have in abundance with somebody and your superconscious will start coming more and more to the conscious mind. Now it has got a door to move into the world.
When the superconscious is completely empty, then the collective superconscious starts dropping its great hidden treasures. And when the collective superconscious is emptied you have come to the ultimate glory, the cosmic conscious.
From this cosmic superconscious mind, each of your acts starts taking on a fragrance of divinity, of godliness. Whatever you touch becomes gold, whatever you say becomes truth. Each of your movements in life creates ripples of beauty, joy, ecstasy, which will go to the farthest ends of existence, touching millions of people who have never known you and who may never know you – but they will share your joy.
You may have felt it sometime – you are sitting, feeling good, and suddenly you become sad and you don’t know why. It is because somebody is releasing ripples of sadness just close by, and they are strong enough to have an impact on you.
Sometimes you feel just the opposite – you feel very light, weightless for no reason: you feel a freshness, a joy. You cannot even tell anybody, “I am feeling joyous;” they will think you are crazy because there is no reason to feel joy. What is the reason? You cannot give a reason because you don’t know it yourself. It is just somebody’s joy that has created a ripple that touched you. We are very sensitive beings. Like the antenna of your radio, it goes on catching every ripple that comes close to you – very subtle ripples.
Most of the time you are suffering other people’s sufferings, and just once in a while you are enjoying somebody else’s joy because the sad and the miserable are many, and the joyful, blissful are very few, very rare. If you can understand this, you will also feel a certain distance when you feel sadness. It may not have anything to do with you. When you feel a certain happiness, a certain pleasure, it may not have anything to do with you. You can keep a certain distance and you can watch these feelings – and watching these feelings will help you to find your own sources.
Man is born with great treasures, but he is also born with the whole animal heritage. Somehow we have to empty out the animal heritage and create a space for the treasure to come to the conscious and be shared, because this is one of the qualities of a treasure: the more you share it, the more you have it.

Osho,
Have you suggested that now is the time for me to live out my negative emotions because in the past I never allowed myself to show them in public? I remember a group experience, years ago, in which one of the exercises was to express, in your own way, any emotion suggested, and I was unable to express anything except anger. Maybe I really didn't even know what such emotions felt like, in a conscious way; I didn't even allow myself to admit that these emotions were there. I am trying to put together the pieces in this puzzle. Am I on track?
First remember not to misunderstand me. I have said, “Express your negative emotions;” I have not said, “Publicly.” That’s how things become distorted.
Now if you are feeling angry with someone and you start expressing your anger, the other person is not going to be a Gautam Buddha and sit silently. He is not a marble statue, he will also do something. You will express anger, he will express anger. It will create more anger in you, and anger or violence from the other side create the same, with more vengeance. And then you will feel like going into it more, because you have been told to express. Yes, I have told you to express, but I don’t mean publicly.
If you are feeling angry go to your room: lock the room, beat the pillow, stand before a mirror, shout at your own image, say things that you have never said to anybody and always wanted to say. But it has to be a private phenomenon, otherwise there is no end. Things go on moving in a circle, and we want to end them.
The moment you feel any negative emotion about anybody, that other person is not the question. The question is that you have a certain energy of anger. Now, that energy has to be diffused into the universe. You are not to repress it within yourself.
So whenever I say, “Express,” I always mean privately, in your aloneness. It is a meditation, it is not a fight. If you are feeling sad, sit in your room and feel as sad as you can – it can’t harm. Be really sad and see how long it stays. Nothing stays forever; soon it will be passing away – if you feel like crying, cry, but in your privacy. These things have nothing to do with others. Everything is your problem; why make it public? And that way it is not going to be helped, but on the contrary, it will be increased.
So every day before going to sleep, for one hour at night, sit on your bed and do all kinds of crazy things that you wanted to do, that people do when they are angry, violent, destructive. And it does not mean that you have to be destructive to very valuable things; just tear paper into small bits and throw them all over – and you know the story. And that will do. Destroy anything valueless – but everything has to be done in your privacy, so when you come out, you come fresh.
If you want to do something in public, do what I was telling you about those primitives. You can go to the person you were angry with and tell him, “In private I have been angry with you. I shouted at you, I abused you, I said ugly things to you; please forgive me. But it was all done in privacy because it was my problem; it has nothing to do with you. But in a certain way it was directed at you, and you are not aware of it, hence an apology is needed.” This has to be done in public. That will help people to help each other. And that person will not be angry. He will say, “There is no need for an apology. You have not done anything to me. And if you are feeling clean, it was a good exercise.”
But in public don’t bring your negativities, your ugliness; otherwise, you are creating bigger problems while trying to solve small problems. Be really very careful. Everything negative has to be in private, in your aloneness. And if you want to make any public statement about it – because somebody may have been in your mind with whom you were hateful, whom you killed while you were tearing the paper – go to him and humbly ask for his forgiveness.
And here you can see my differences from the so-called Western therapies. They don’t help, their relief is temporary. But once and for all, understand that every problem is yours, so it has to be solved in your privacy. Don’t wash your dirty linen in public places. There is no need. Why unnecessarily involve other people? Why unnecessarily create an image of yourself as ugly?
I am reminded of a very strange story…

There was a great conference, a world conference of psychologists, psychoanalysts, therapists and all other schools for treating man’s mind. One great psychoanalyst was reading a paper. But he could not read it because his attention was continually distracted by a young female psychoanalyst who was sitting in the front row, and an old ugly fellow who was continuously playing with her breasts. And she was not bothered at all.
He could not read his paper. He tried to hide that woman and that old man behind the paper, but he would forget which line he was reading and he got so messed up that finally he said, “It is impossible.”
The conference could not understand what was impossible and why he’s behaving in such a way – he was a very systematic thinker, and today he is talking nonsense. He reads half of one sentence and then another which has no connection with it, and then another page comes in, and now he is saying, “It is all messed up and I cannot…”
And he would not look at the woman who was sitting just in front. Somebody stood up and said, “What is the matter? Why are you making a fool of yourself?”
He said, “I am not making a fool of myself. This young lady is not doing anything, and that old ugly fellow is playing with her breasts.”
The young lady said, “But that is not your problem. You should read your paper. Even I am not taking it as my problem. It is his problem, so why should I be worried? He has a repressed sexuality; perhaps he could not get his mother’s breast for long enough. And he is still, at this age, he must be eighty… He is not doing any harm to me. It is not my problem, so why should I stop him? And it is not your problem, why should you get disturbed? It is simply his problem. He should get psychoanalyzed – and he himself is a great psychoanalyst. In fact, he is my teacher.”
But what the woman said, “It is not my problem, what he is doing,” needs a very integrated personality, a very clear-cut vision that even though he is doing something with her, the problem is his.
She continued “Why should I get disturbed? The poor fellow has been suffering from his very childhood it seems, and he has never found any opportunity – and now he is almost half in his grave. If I can give him some satisfaction, there is no harm. It does me no harm at all. But I am puzzled why you could not read your paper. You seem to be standing behind this old fellow. You also have the same problem.”
And it was a fact. That man also had the same problem, otherwise there was nothing to be worried about. He should read his paper and let the old man do what he is doing. And if the young lady is not preventing him, is not even taking note of him, it is none of his business.

If people can keep to their own problems, and don’t go on spreading them all around – because then they become magnified.
Now what this old man needed was simply a baby’s milk bottle, so in his aloneness at night he can suck lukewarm milk from the bottle and enjoy it. And in darkness, whether it is a nipple or just a rubber teat makes no difference. All that he needs is a small baby’s milk bottle every night so that he can die peacefully without any problem. But he is throwing it on a poor woman who has nothing to do with it. And not only that, somebody else who is absolutely out of the whole thing is disturbed because he also has the same problem.
Just keep your private problems to yourself. Group therapy is not of much help because whatever you do in the group you cannot do in the society. And the group cannot become your whole life; out of the group you will again be in the same trouble.
What I am giving to you is a simple method that you can do by yourself very easily. Clean your unconscious and come back into the outside world, with other people – with a softer face, cleaner eyes, more human acts.
So everything is right, just don’t misunderstand me. You have used that word public; it is not a question of public, it is your problem. Why bother the public? – they have their own problems. Let them tackle their problems in their privacy. Other than that, you are on the right track.
Express. Find a way to express it as cheaply as possible, as economically as possible, but always in your aloneness so that only you know the ugliness that you have thrown out.
Osho,
Did you have an awareness of your past lives before you were enlightened?
Yes.
Osho,
Although you were born almost enlightened, when I listen to your stories of your early life, I never get the impression that you saw yourself as a spiritual seeker. Were you looking for enlightenment, or was enlightenment a by-product of an impeccable resolve to never compromise what you felt to be true?
There are things which cannot be sought directly. The more valuable a thing is, the more indirectly you have to go into it. In fact you have to do something else that simply prepares the situation around you – in which things like enlightenment, truth, can happen.
You cannot go seeking and searching for truth. Where will you go? Kabul? Kulu-Manali? Kathmandu? Goa?…and then back home. All seekers of truth go this route and come back home looking more foolish than before. They have not found anything.
Where will you go to seek the truth? You don’t know the way, there is no map, there is no direction available. Nobody knows what, where, when it is possible to realize truth.
The real seeker of truth never seeks truth. On the contrary, he tries to clean himself of all that is untrue, unauthentic, insincere – and when his heart is ready, purified, the guest comes. You cannot find the guest, you cannot go after him. He comes to you; you just have to be prepared. You have to be in a right attitude.
I have never been spiritual in the sense that you understand the word. I have never gone to the temples or the churches, or read scriptures, or followed certain practices to find truth, or worshipped God or prayed to God. That has not been my way at all. So certainly you can say that I was not doing anything spiritual. But to me spirituality has a totally different connotation. It needs an honest individuality. It does not allow any kind of dependence. It creates a freedom for itself, whatever the cost. It is never in the crowd but alone, because the crowd has never found any truth. The truth has been found only in people’s aloneness.
So my spirituality has a different meaning from your idea of spirituality. My childhood stories – if you can understand them – will point to all these qualities in some way or other. Nobody can call them spiritual. I call them spiritual, because to me they have given all that man can aspire to.
While listening to my childhood stories you should try to look for some quality in it – not just the story but some intrinsic quality that runs like a thin thread through all of my memoirs. And that thin thread is spiritual.
Spiritual, to me, simply means finding oneself. I never allowed anybody to do this work on my behalf – because nobody can do this work on your behalf; you have to do it yourself. And you cannot do it directly either, you have to create a certain milieu in which it happens. It is a happening; enlightenment, liberation, awakening, realization – all these words point towards absolutely one thing and that is a happening.
That creates a kind of fear in many people: “If it is happening, then what are we supposed to do? Whenever it will happen, it will happen.” That is not so. It is a happening, but you can do much to prepare the ground for it to happen.
Preparing the ground may not look spiritual to those who do not understand. But it must be spiritual because the enlightenment has happened.
The end proves that whatever means were used were substantially right. It is the goal that proves that the way that was followed was right.