---
title: The Ultimate Alchemy Vol 2 01
series: The Ultimate Alchemy Vol 2 01-15
talk_number: 1
url: https://oshoworld.com/the-ultimate-alchemy-vol-2-01
language: English
duration: 01:38:19
author: THE UPANISHADS
scraped_at: 2026-01-03T09:34:58.010497+00:00
---
Chidagni swaroopam dhoopah.

To create the fire of awareness in oneself is dhoop – the incense.
For philosophy, many are the problems, infinite. But for religion there is only one problem, and that problem is man himself – not that man has problems, but man is the problem. And why is man the problem?
Animals are not problems. They are so unconscious, blissfully unconscious, so ignorant, that there is no possibility of there being any awareness of problems. Problems are there, but animals are not aware. There are no problems for gods, because they are totally conscious. When the mind is a total consciousness, problems simply disappear like darkness. But for man there is anguish. The very being of man, the very existence of man, is a problem, because man exists between these two realms: the realm of the animals and the realm of the gods.
Man exists as a bridge between two infinities: the infinity of ignorance and the infinity of knowledge. Man is neither animal nor divine. Or, man is both – animal and divine. That is the problem. Man is a suspended existence, something incomplete, something which is still to be, a becoming, not a being.
Animals have beings; man is a becoming. He is not, he is only becoming. Man is a process. The process is incomplete. It has left the world of ignorance and it has not reached the world of knowledge. Man is in between. That creates the problem, the tension, the anguish, and the constant conflict.
There are only two ways to be at peace, to be without problems. One is to fall back, to regress, to fall back to the world of animals. The other is to transcend, to go forward, and to be a part of the divine being. Either to be animals or to be gods, these are the two alternatives.
To fall back is easy, but it is going to be a temporary thing, because once you have grown you cannot fall back permanently. You can regress for a moment, then you are again thrown forward, because there is no way to go back, there is no possibility of falling back. You cannot be a child again if you have become young, adult, and you cannot become young again if you have become old. If you know something, then you cannot fall back to the state when you were ignorant. You cannot go back. But for a moment you can forget the present and relive the past – in your memory, in your mind.
So man can regress to the animal. It is blissful, but temporary. That is the reason intoxicants, drugs, alcohol, have such appeal. When you are unconscious through any chemical thing, you have fallen back, for a moment. For the time being you are not man, you are not a problem. You are again part of the world of animals, the unconscious. You are not a man. That’s why there are no problems.
Humanity has been constantly finding things – from soma rasa to LSD – to forget, to regress, to be just childlike, to regain the animal innocence, to be without problems: that is, to be without humanity, because to me humanity means to be a problem. This falling back, this regression, is possible, but only temporarily. You will come back again, you will be a man again, and the same problems will be standing and waiting for you. Rather, they will be more acute. Your absence is not going to dissolve them. They will become more complicated and complex. Then a vicious circle is created.
When you are again back, conscious, you have to face problems which have become more complicated because of your absence. They have grown. Then you have to forget yourself again and again. And every time you forget and regress, your problems are growing, and you have to face your humanity again and again. One cannot escape that way. One can deceive oneself, but one cannot escape that way.
The other alternative is arduous. That is to grow, to become, to be a being. When I say “regress,” I mean to be unconscious, to lose the small consciousness that we have. And when I say “to be a being,” I mean to lose unconsciousness and to be totally conscious.
As we are, only a part is conscious, only a very small fragment of our being is conscious, and the remaining whole continent is just dark. A small island is conscious, and the whole continent, the mainland, is under darkness. When this small island also becomes dark you have regressed, you have fallen back.
This ignorance is blissful because now you are not aware of the problems. Problems are there, but you are not aware. So at least for you there are no problems. This is the ostrich method: close your eyes and your enemy is not there. Because when you cannot see, this childish, juvenile logic says that when you cannot see something, it is not; unless you see something, it is not. So if you cannot feel problems they are not there.
And when I say “to be a being, to transcend humanity, to become divine,” I mean to be totally conscious – not only an island, but the whole continent. This awareness will also lead you beyond problems, because problems are there basically because of you. Problems are not objective realities, they are subjective phenomena. You create your problems. And unless you are transformed, you will go on creating problems. You can solve one, but, really, in solving that one you will create many, because you remain the same. Problems are not objective things, they are part of you. Because you are such, you create such problems.
Science tries to solve problems objectively, and science thinks if there are no problems man will be at ease. Problems can be solved objectively but man will not be at ease, because man himself is the problem. If he solves some problems, he will create others. He is the creator. You create a better society: problems will change, but problems will remain. You create better health, better medicine: problems will change, but problems will remain.
Quantitatively, there will be as many problems as ever, because the man remains the same, only the situation changes. You change the situation: old problems will not be there, but there will be new problems. And new problems are more problematic than any old problems, because you have become accustomed to old problems. With new problems you feel more inconvenience. That’s why in our times we have changed the whole situation, but problems are there – more settled, more anxiety creating.
That’s the difference between religion and science. Science thinks problems are objective, somewhere outside, somewhere there – that they can be changed without changing you. Religion thinks problems are somewhere here inside, in me – rather, I am the problem. Unless I change, nothing is going to be different. Shapes will be different, names will be different, but the substance will remain the same. I will create another…another world of problems. I will go on projecting new problems.
This man, unconscious to his own being, is the creator of problems. Unaware of himself, not knowing who he is, what he is, without any acquaintance with himself, he goes on creating problems – because unless you know yourself, you cannot know for what you are existing and living, you cannot know where you have to move, you cannot feel what your destiny is, and you can never feel any meaning. You will go on doing many things, but everything will ultimately lead you to frustration, because without knowing why you are, for what you are, if you do anything, it is not going to give you a deep contentment. It is irrelevant. The very point is missed, your effort is wasted.
And, ultimately, everyone is frustrated. Those who succeed are more frustrated than those who are not successful, because those who are not successful can still hope, but those who are successful, they cannot even hope. Their case becomes hopeless. So I say nothing fails like success.
Religion thinks in terms of subjectivity, science in terms of objectivity: “Change the situation – don’t touch the man.” Religion says, “Change the man – situation is irrelevant.” Whatsoever the situation, a different mind, a transformed being, will be beyond problems. That’s why a buddha can exist in absolute peace as a beggar, and a Midas cannot exist and live at peace even when he has the alchemical miracle with him: whatsoever he touches becomes gold. The situation with Midas has become golden, everything he touches becomes gold. But this doesn’t change anything; rather, Midas is in a more complicated, problematic situation.
Now our world has created, through science, a Midas situation. Now we can touch anything and it becomes gold. A buddha living as a beggar lives in such a deep peace and silence that emperors become jealous of him. What is the secret? The emphasis, the man, the inside of man, is significant, not the situation. So if you change the inside of man…and there is only one change. If you grow in your awareness, you change, you mutate. If you fall down in your awareness, again you change, you mutate. If your awareness is lessened, you fall down towards animals. If your awareness is increased, you fall up towards godliness.
This is the only problem for religion: how to increase awareness. That’s why religions have always been against drugs. The reason is not moral or ethical, no. And the so-called moralist puritans have given a very wrong color to the whole thing. For religions, it is not a question of morality that someone takes drugs. It is not a question of morality at all, because morality begins only when I come in contact with someone else.
If I take alcohol and become unconscious, it is no one else’s affair. I am doing something with myself. Violence is a question for morality, not alcohol. Even if I give you a promise to meet at a particular time and miss, it is immoral because somebody else is involved. Alcohol can become a moral question only if someone else is involved, otherwise it is not a moral question at all. It is something you do with yourself. But for religions it is not a question of morality at all. For religions it is a deeper question: it is a question of decreasing or increasing awareness.
If once you get in the habit of falling down in unconsciousness, it will be more and more difficult to increase your awareness. It will become more and more difficult, because your body will not support you in increasing awareness. It will support you in decreasing it. The very metabolism of your body will help you to be unconscious. It will not help you to be conscious. And anything that becomes a barrier in being more aware is a religious problem, not a moral problem.
So sometimes it happens: you may find an alcoholic a more moral person than a nonalcoholic, but never a more religious person. An alcoholic may be more compassionate than a nonalcoholic; may be more loving than a nonalcoholic, may be more honest, but never more religious. And when I say “never more religious,” I mean never a more aware and conscious person.
This growth into awareness creates the anguish.
It will be good to understand the old biblical story of Adam and Eve. They were expelled from Heaven, they were expelled from the Garden of Eden. It is a very deep psychological story. God allowed them to eat anything they liked, they desired, except one fruit. One tree was not to be touched at all, and that tree was the tree of knowledge.
This is strange, God forbidding his children to eat the fruit of the tree of knowledge. This looks very contradictory. What type of a God is this, and what type of a father, who is against his children being wise and knowing? This story has troubled many minds. Why should God prohibit knowledge? We value knowledge very much, but it was forbidden.
Adam and Eve existed in an animal world. They were blissful, but they were ignorant – they were blissful, but they were ignorant. Children are blissful, but they are ignorant. And children, if they have to grow, must grow in knowledge. There is no other way for growth. And if you are ignorant, you may be blissful but you cannot be aware of your blissfulness.
That has to be understood: you can be blissful when you are ignorant, but you cannot feel your blissfulness, you cannot be aware of your blissfulness. The moment you begin to feel your blissfulness, you are out of ignorance. Knowledge has entered, you have become a knowing one. So Adam and Eve existed just as animals, absolutely ignorant – blissful, but remember, this blissfulness, too, was not a known fact to them. They were just blissful without knowing it.
The story says the Devil tempted Eve to eat the fruit. And the reason the Devil could tempt Eve was this, that “If you eat this fruit, you will be like God.” This is very meaningful. “Unless you eat this fruit of the tree of knowledge you can never be like God, you will remain animals.” And that’s why God had prohibited, forbidden them, to touch this tree. They were tempted.
This word devil is very beautiful, and for Indians particularly it has a different shade and significance than for Christians, because devil comes from the same word, from the same root, from which deva, devata comes. Devil and divine both come from the same root. So it seems the Christian story is a misrepresentation, somehow incomplete. One thing is known: the Devil himself was a rebellious god, a rebellious angel who rebelled against God. But he was a god himself.
Why am I saying this? Because to me there are not two forces in the world, God and Devil. That dichotomy is false. There is only one force. And the dichotomy is not of two enemies but of two polarities of one force: God-and-Devil, one force working as two polarities – because unless a force works in two polarities it cannot work.
So to me this biblical story takes on a new meaning: God prohibited because you can tempt only if you prohibit. If the tree of knowledge was not mentioned at all, it seems improbable that Adam would ever have thought of or imagined this particular tree. The Garden of Eden was big, there were infinite trees. We don’t even know the name of any other tree.
This tree became important because it was prohibited. This prohibition became an invitation, this denial became the temptation. It is not really the Devil who tempted. In the first place, God himself tempted. This was the temptation: “Don’t go near the tree of knowledge! Don’t eat the fruit of it. Only one tree is prohibited, otherwise you are free.” Suddenly this one tree becomes the most important in the whole Garden.
And to me devil is just another name for the divine – the other polarity. And the Devil tempted Eve because “Then you will be like God!” This was the promise. And who would not like to be like God? Who would not like it?
Adam and Eve were tempted, and then they were expelled from Heaven. But this expulsion is part of the process. Really, this Heaven was an animal existence, blissful, but ignorant. Because of this eating of the fruit of the tree of knowledge, Adam and Eve became human beings. Before that they were not human beings at all. They became human beings – when I say this I mean they became problems.
It is reported that the first words Adam asserted just coming out of the gate of the Garden were this: “We are living in a very revolutionary time.” It was a revolutionary time. Never will the human mind know such a revolution again: this expulsion from the animal world, this expulsion from a blissful, ignorant existence. The times were really revolutionary. Other revolutions are just nothing – the greatest revolution was that, that expulsion.
But why were they expelled? The moment you know, the moment you become aware, you cannot live in bliss. Problems will arise. Even if you are in bliss, this problem will come to your mind: “Why am I in bliss? Why?” And you cannot feel bliss unless you begin to feel anguish, because every feeling is possible only with its polar opposite. You can feel happiness only if you begin to feel unhappiness, and you can begin to feel a healthy wellbeing only when you begin to feel illness. You cannot be aware of life unless you become afraid of death.
Animals live, but they are not aware that they are alive because they are not aware of any death. Death is not a problem, so life passes through them, but they are not alive in the same sense as man is. Man becomes alive, aware of his being alive, only because of death. With knowledge the polarity comes into existence, and with polarity the problems. Then every moment is a conflict. Then every moment you are suspended into two. Then never again will you be one. You will be continuously divided, in conflict, in inner turmoil.
So, really, that was a revolution, the revolution, rather: Adam and Eve turned out, expelled. Really, this story is very beautiful. No one expelled them, no one ordered them, no one said, “Go out!” They were out. The moment they became aware, they were not in the Garden at all. This was automatic. Think about this: a dog sitting here suddenly becomes aware of the whole situation…he is expelled! No one expels him, but he is no longer an animal. He is thrown out, and he can never again be the same.
Adam and Eve tried again and again to enter, but they have not yet found the gate again. They go round and round, but the gate is always missed. There is no gate. The expulsion is total and ultimate. They cannot enter again because knowledge is a sweet and bitter fruit – sweet and bitter both. Sweet because it gives you power and bitter because it gives you problems. Sweet because for the first time you become an ego, and bitter because with the ego every disease will be yours. It is a double-edged sword.
Adam was tempted because the Devil said, “You will become like God. You will be powerful.” Knowledge is power, but if you know, you have to know both sides of the coin. You can feel more life, but you will become aware of death. You will be more blissful, you can be more blissful, but in the same proportion you will have to suffer anguish.
This is the problem, this is what man is: a deep anguish, a deep division between two polarities.
You can feel life, but when death is there everything is poisoned. When death is there every moment, everything is poisoned. How can you be alive when death is there? How can you feel blissful when suffering is there? And even if a moment of happiness comes to you, it is fleeting. And when the moment is there, even then you are aware that somewhere behind, the unhappiness is there, the misery is there, hiding. It will come up soon – sooner or later. So even a moment of happiness is poisoned by your consciousness that somewhere unhappiness is hidden, is coming near. It is just by the corner and you will have to meet it.
Man becomes conscious of the future, conscious of the past, conscious of life, conscious of death. Kierkegaard has called this consciousness anguish. You can fall back, but that’s a temporary measure. Again you will come up. So the only possibility is to grow – to grow in knowledge to such a point from where you can jump out of it, because the jump is possible only from the extreme. One extreme we have: to fall back. We can do it, but it is impossible because we cannot remain in it. We are thrown forward again and again. The other possibility is that if we grow in awareness, there comes a point when you are totally aware…you transcend.
We have known, now we must know something beyond knowledge. We have come out of the Garden because of knowledge, and we can enter this Garden again only when we throw this knowledge. But this throwing is not possible by regression. That gate from which Adam was expelled we can never find again. We can find another gate from which Christ was invited, or a buddha is invited. We can throw this knowledge, we can throw awareness, but only from the extreme point where we are totally aware.
When one becomes totally aware, then even this feeling that “I am aware” is thrown. Just like animals are happy and blissful – they don’t know. When you are totally aware, you become godly. And if that awareness is total, you are simply aware without knowing that you are aware.
This simple awareness will begin the entry, will be the entry. You will be again in the Garden – not now as animals but as gods. And this is an inevitable process. This expulsion of Adam and the entry of a Jesus is an inevitable process. One has to be thrown out of one’s ignorance; this is the first step. And then one has to be thrown out of one’s knowledge; that is the second step.
This sutra is concerned with awareness:
To create the fire of awareness in oneself is the incense.
To create the fire of awareness in oneself… Three things have to be understood. First, what is meant by awareness? You are walking, you are aware of many things: of the shops, of people passing by you, of the traffic, of everything. You are aware of many things, only unaware of one thing: yourself. You are walking on the street, you are aware of many things, only you are not aware of yourself. This awareness of the self Gurdjieff has called “self-remembering.” Gurdjieff says, “Constantly, wherever you are, remember yourself.”
For example, you are here. You are listening to me, but you are not aware of the listener. You may be aware of the speaker, but you are not aware of the listener. Be aware of the listener. Feel yourself here. You are here. For a moment a glimpse comes, and again you forget. Try!
Whatsoever you are doing, go on doing one thing inside continuously: be aware of yourself doing it. You are eating: be aware of yourself. You are walking: be aware of yourself. You are listening, you are speaking: be aware of yourself. When you are angry, be aware that you are angry. In the very moment when anger is there, be aware that you are angry. This constant remembering of the self creates a certain energy, a very subtle energy in you. You begin to be a crystallized being.
Ordinarily, we are just a loose bag. No crystallization, no center really, just a liquidity, just a loose combination of many things without any center, a crowd, constantly shifting and changing, with no master inside. By awareness is meant, be a master. And when I say “be a master,” I don’t mean to be a controller. When I say “be a master,” I mean be a presence, a continuous presence. Whatsoever you are doing or not doing, one thing must be constantly in your consciousness: that you are.
This simple feeling of oneself, that one is, creates a center: a center of stillness, a center of silence, a center of inner mastery, an inner power. And when I say “an inner power,” I mean it literally. That’s why this sutra says the fire of awareness. It is a fire. It is a fire. If you begin to be aware, you begin to feel a new energy in you, a new fire, a new life. And because of this new life, new power, new energy, many things which were dominating you just dissolve. You have not to fight with them.
You have to fight with your anger, your greed, your sex, because you are weak. So, really, greed, anger and sex are not the problems. Weakness is the problem. Once you begin to be stronger inside – and with your feeling of inner presence, that you are, your energies are concentrated, crystallized on a single point – a self is born. Remember, not an ego but a self is born. Ego is a false sense of self. Without having any self, you go on believing that you have a self. That is ego. Ego means a false self. You are not a self, and still you believe that you are a self.

Maulingaputta, a seeker of the truth, came to Buddha. Buddha asked him, “What are you seeking?”
Maulingaputta said, “I am seeking my self. Help me.”
Buddha asked him to give a promise that whatsoever is said will be done by him. Maulingaputta began to weep and he said, “How can I promise? – because I am not. I am yet not, how can I promise? I don’t know what I am going to be tomorrow. I don’t have any self which can promise, so don’t ask me the impossible. I will try. At the most this much I can say: I will try. But I cannot say whatsoever you say I will do, because who will do it? I am seeking that which can promise and which can fulfill a promise. I am yet not.”
Buddha said, “Maulingaputta, to hear this I asked you that question. If you had promised, I would have turned you out. Had you said that ‘I promise, I will do it,’ then I would have known that you are really not a seeker for the self.”

Because a seeker must know that he is not yet. Otherwise, what is the purpose of seeking? If you are already, there is no need. You are not. And if one can feel this, then the ego evaporates. Ego is a false notion of something which is not there at all.
Self means a center which can promise.
This center is created by being continuously aware, constantly aware. Be aware that you are doing something: that you are sitting, that now you are going to sleep, that now sleep is coming to you, you are falling. Try to be conscious in every moment, and then you will begin to feel a center is born within you, things have begun to crystallize, a centering is there. Everything now is related to a center.
So we are without centers. Sometimes we feel centered, but those are moments when a situation makes you aware. If there is suddenly a situation, a very dangerous situation, you will begin to feel a center in you, because in danger you become aware. If someone is going to kill you, you cannot think in that moment, you cannot be unconscious in that moment. Your whole energy is centered and that moment becomes solid. You cannot move to the past, you cannot move to the future. This very moment becomes everything. And then you are not only aware of the killer: you become aware of yourself, the one who is being killed.
In that subtle moment you begin to feel a center in yourself. That’s why dangerous games have their appeal. Ask someone going to the top of Gourishankar, Everest. When for the first time Hillary was there, he must have felt a sudden center. When for the first time someone was on the moon, a sudden feeling of a center must have come. That’s why danger has appeal. You are driving a car and you go on increasing your speed, and then the speed becomes dangerous. Then you cannot think; thoughts cease. Then you cannot dream. Then you cannot imagine. Then the present becomes solid. In that dangerous moment, when any moment death is possible, you are suddenly aware of a center in yourself. Danger has appeal only because in danger sometimes you feel centered.
Nietzsche somewhere says that war must continue, because only in war sometimes a self is felt, a center is felt, because war is danger. And when death becomes a reality, life becomes intense. When death is just near, life becomes intense and you are centered. But in any moment when you become aware of yourself, there is a centering. However, if it is situational, then with the situation it will disappear.
It must not be just situational. It must be inner. So try it in every ordinary activity. Sitting on your chair, try it: be aware of the sitter. Not only of the chair, not only of the room, of the surrounding atmosphere, be aware of the sitter. Close your eyes and feel yourself, dig deep and feel yourself.

Herrigel was learning with a Zen master. He was learning archery for three years continuously, and the master would always say, “It is good. Whatsoever you are doing is good, but not enough.”
Herrigel himself became a master archer. His aim became one hundred percent perfect and still the master would say, “You are doing well, but it is not enough.” With one hundred percent perfect aim!
So Herrigel asked, “What is your expectation? Now how can I grow more? With hundred percent accuracy, what more do you expect?”
The Zen master is reported to have said, “I am not concerned with your archery and your aim, I am concerned with you. You have become a perfect technician, but when your arrow leaves the bow you are not aware of yourself, so it is futile. I am not concerned with the arrow reaching the target, I am concerned with you! When on the bow the arrow is arrowed, inside also your consciousness must be arrowed. And even if you miss the target, it makes no difference – but the inner target must not be missed, and you are missing that. You have become a perfect technician, but you are an imitator.”
But to a Western mind or, really, to a modern mind – and the Western mind is the modern mind – it is very difficult to conceive. It appears nonsense. Archery is concerned with a particular efficiency in aiming.
Herrigel became disappointed by and by, and one day he said, “Now I am leaving. It seems impossible, it is impossible! When you are aiming at something, your awareness goes to the aim, to the object. And if you are to be a successful archer, you have to forget yourself, to remember only the aim, the target. Forget everything. Forget yourself. Let there be only the target.”
And this Zen master was consistently forcing him to create another target inside: “This arrow must be double-arrowed – pointing towards the target outside and continuously pointing towards the inside, the self.”
Herrigel said, “Now I will leave. It seems impossible. Your conditions cannot be fulfilled.”
The day he was leaving, he was just sitting. He had come to take leave of the master, and the master was aiming at a target. Someone else was learning, and for the first time Herrigel was not involved. He had just come to take leave. He was sitting. The moment the master was finished with his teaching, he would take his leave and go. For the first time he was not involved.
And then suddenly he became aware of the master – and the double-arrowed consciousness of the master. The master was aiming. For three years continuously Herrigel had been with the same man, but he was more concerned with his own effort. He had never seen this man, what he was doing. For the first time he saw, and he realized. And suddenly, spontaneously, with no effort, he came to the master, took the bow from his hand, aimed at the target, released the arrow, and the master said, “Okay, for the first time you have done it. I am happy.”
What had he done? For the first time he was centered in himself. The target was there, but he was also there, present.

So whatsoever you are doing, whatsoever, no need of any archery, whatsoever you are doing, even just sitting, be double-arrowed. Remember what is going on outside, and also remember who is inside.

Lin Chi was lecturing one morning and someone suddenly asked, “Just answer me one question: Who am I?”
Lin Chi got down, went to the man. The whole hall became silent. What was he going to do? It was a simple question. He should have answered from his seat. He reached the man. The whole hall silent…Lin Chi standing before the questioner, looking into his eyes. It was a very penetrating moment. Everything stopped. The questioner began to perspire. He was just staring into his eyes.
And then Lin Chi said, “Don’t ask me! Go inside and find out who is asking. Close your eyes! Don’t ask ‘Who am I?’ Go inside and find out who is asking, who is this questioner inside. Forget me. Find out the source of the question. Go deep inside.”
And it is reported that the man closed his eyes, became silent and suddenly he was an enlightened one. He opened his eyes, and he laughed, and he touched the feet of Lin Chi, and he said, “You have answered me. I have been asking everyone this question, and many answers were given to me, but nothing proved to be an answer. And you have answered me.”
“Who am I?” – how can anyone answer it? But in that particular situation – a thousand persons silent, a pin-drop silence – Lin Chi coming down, staring in the eyes, and then just ordering the man, “Close your eyes. Go inside and find out who the questioner is. Don’t wait for the answer. Find out who has asked.”
And the man closed his eyes. What happened in that situation? He became centered. Suddenly he was centered, suddenly he became aware of the innermost core.

This has to be discovered, and awareness means the method to discover this innermost core. The more unconscious you are, the farther away you are from yourself. The more conscious, the nearer we reach to our self. If the consciousness is total, we are at the center. If the consciousness is less, we are near the periphery. When we are unconscious, we are on the periphery; the center is completely forgotten.
So these are the two possible ways to move. You can move to the periphery; then you move to unconsciousness. Sitting at a film, sitting somewhere listening to music, you can forget yourself. You are on the periphery. Even listening to me you can forget yourself, then you are on the periphery. Reading the Gita or the Bible or the Koran you can forget yourself, then you are on the periphery. Doing whatsoever, if you can remember yourself, then you are nearer the center. And someday, suddenly, you are centered. Then you have energy.
That energy this sutra calls “the fire.” The whole of life, the whole of existence, is energy, is fire. Fire is the old name; now they call it electricity. Or man has been labeling it with many many names, but fire is good. Electricity looks a little dead; fire looks more alive.
This inner fire, the sutra says, is the incense. When someone is going to worship, you take some incense, dhoop, with you. That dhoop, that incense, is useless – unless you have come with your inner fire as the incense.
This Upanishad is trying to give inner meanings to outer symbols. Every symbol has an inner counterpart. The outer is good in itself, but it is not enough. And it is only symbolic, it is not the substance. It shows something, but it is not the real. You must have seen incense; it is burning everywhere in temples. It is good in itself, but an outer symbol. An inner fire is needed. And just like incense gives a perfume, so does the inner fire also.
It is said that wherever Mahavira moved, everyone would feel his presence as a subtle perfume. That has been said about many persons; that’s possible! The more you are centered inside, the more your whole presence becomes a perfume. And those who have the receptivity, they will feel it.
So enter a temple not with outer incense but with inner incense. And this inner incense can be achieved only through awareness. There is no other way. Act mindfully. It is a long, arduous journey. It is difficult even to be aware for a single moment. The mind is constantly flickering, but it is not impossible. It is arduous, it is difficult, it is not impossible. It is possible. For everyone it is possible. Only effort is needed, and a wholehearted effort. Nothing should be left; nothing should be there inside left untouched. Everything should be sacrificed for awareness. Only then is the inner flame discovered. It is there.
If one goes to find out the essential unity between all the religions that have existed or that may exist ever, then this single word awareness will be found.
Jesus tells a story:

The master of a big house has gone out, and he has told the servants to be constantly alert, because any moment he can come back. So for twenty-four hours they have to be alert. Any moment the master can come – any moment. There is no fixed moment, no fixed day, no fixed date. If there is a fixed date, then you can sleep, then you can do whatsoever you like. On that particular date you will be alert: the master is coming. But the master has said, “I will come any moment. Day and night you have to be alert to receive me.”

This is the parable of life. You cannot postpone. Any moment the divine guest may come; any moment the master may come. One has to be alert continuously. No date is fixed; nothing is known about when that sudden happening will be there. One can do only one thing: be alert and wait.
Rabindranath has written a poem, The King of the Night. It is a very deep parable.

There was a great temple with one hundred priests, and one day the chief priest dreamed that the divine guest was to come that night – for whom they have been waiting and waiting. For centuries the temple has been waiting for the king to come, the divine king to come. The deity of the temple was to come. Many laughed: “It is just a dream. Why pay so much attention to it?”
Even the chief priest was in doubt: “It may be just a dream. And if it is just a dream then everyone will laugh. But who knows, it may be true. It may be just a true intimation.”
So first he brooded in the morning, whether to tell it to others or not. Then he became afraid. It may be true – then? So in the afternoon he told it. He gathered all the priests, closed the doors of the temple, and said to them, “Don’t go out and don’t tell anyone. It may be just a dream – no one knows. But I have dreamed, and the dream was so real, that the deity, the king of this temple, says, ‘I am coming this night. Be ready.’ So we have to be ready and alert. This night we cannot go to sleep.”
So they decorated the whole temple, they cleaned the whole temple. They made every arrangement to receive the guest. And then they waited. Then, by and by, doubts began to arise. Then someone said, “This is nonsense! This was just a dream, and we are wasting our sleep.”
Half the night passed, then doubts began to arise more. Then someone rebelled and he said, “I am going to sleep. This is nonsense. The whole day wasted, and now we are waiting. No one is going to come.” And many supported him.
Then even the chief priest yielded and he said, “It may be just a dream, how can I say that it was real? We may be just stupid, foolish, following a dream.”
So they said, “Only one person should wait at the gate and all else can go to sleep. If someone comes, he will inform us.”
Ninety-nine priests went to sleep, and the one priest who was appointed, he said, “When ninety-nine think that it is just a dream, why should I waste my sleep? If the divine Guest is to come, let him come. And he will come in a great chariot, so there will be much noise and everyone will be awake.” He closed the doors. He also fell asleep.
And then the chariot came. The wheels of the chariot created much noise. Then someone in his sleep said, “It seems the king is coming. It seems the wheels of the chariot are making much noise.” Then someone else said, “Just go to sleep. Don’t waste time. No one is coming. This is not a chariot, these are just clouds in the sky.”
And then the guest came, and he knocked at the door. Then someone else again said in his sleep, “It seems someone has come and is knocking at the door.”
So the chief priest himself said, “Now go to sleep. Don’t go on disturbing again and again. No one is knocking at the door; it is just the wind.”
In the morning they were weeping and crying because the chariot had come in the night. There were marks on the street and the divine guest had come up to the door and knocked. There were footmarks in the dust on the steps.

There are many parables. Buddha has told, Mahavira has told, many stories with only one essential idea: that the enlightenment is possible any time, any moment. It can happen any moment. One has to be alert and conscious and aware.
This parable, this King of the Night, is not just a parable, it is real. We all are interpreting things in that way, and all our interpretations are just rationalizations of our sleep and for our sleep: “It is nothing but the wind, it is nothing but the clouds.” Then we can sleep at ease. We go on denying religion, we go on denying anything that will break our sleep. We rationalize: “There is no God, there is no religion, there is nothing – nothing but wind, nothing but clouds.” Then we can sleep at ease, comfortably.
If there is godliness, if there is divinity, if there is a possibility of something higher than we are, then we cannot sleep so conveniently. Then we will have to be alert and awake and struggling, and making efforts and endeavoring. Then transformation becomes our immediate concern.
Awareness is the technique for centering in oneself, for achieving the inner fire. It is there, hidden. It can be discovered. And once it is discovered, then only are we capable of entering the temple – not before, never before.
But we can deceive ourselves by symbols. Symbols are to show deeper realities to us, but we can use them as deceptions. We can burn an outer incense – we can burn, we can do, we can worship, with outer things, and can feel at ease that we have done something. We can feel ourselves religious without becoming religious at all. That’s what is happening; that’s what the earth has become. Everyone thinks they are religious just because they are following outer symbols, with no inner fire.
Make efforts. Even if you are a failure…you will be. In the beginning you will fail again and again, but even your failure will help. When you fail to be aware for a single moment, you feel for the first time how unconscious you are.
Walk down the street, and you cannot walk a few steps without becoming unconscious. Again and again you forget yourself. You begin to read a signboard, and you forget yourself. Someone passes and you look at him, and you forget yourself.
Your failures will be helpful. They will show you how unconscious you are. And even if you can become aware that you are unconscious, you have gained a certain awareness. If a madman becomes aware that he is mad, he is on the path toward sanity.

============================================================

Osho,
After eating the fruit of the tree of knowledge, Adam and Eve, for the first time, became aware of their nakedness and felt ashamed. What is the deeper meaning behind this feeling?
And, secondly, it has been said that the forbidden fruit of the tree of knowledge is knowledge of sex. What is your view about this?
Nature in itself is innocent, but the moment man becomes aware of it many problems arise, and what is natural and innocent is interpreted. And when it is interpreted, it is neither innocent nor natural. When humanity becomes aware of it, man begins to interpret it, and the very interpretation begins to produce many concepts – of guilt, of sin, of morality, of immorality.
The story of Adam and Eve says that when the fruit of the tree of knowledge was eaten, for the first time they became aware of their nakedness and felt ashamed. They were naked, but they had never been aware of it. The awareness, the very awareness, creates a gap.
The moment you are aware of something, you begin to judge. You are different from it. For example, Adam was naked. Everyone is born naked like Adam, but children are not aware of their nakedness. They cannot judge it, whether it is good or bad. They are not aware, so they cannot judge. When Adam became aware that he was naked, judgment entered: “Now, is this nakedness good or bad?”
Every animal was naked around him, but no animal was aware of his nakedness. Adam became aware, and with this awareness he became unique. Now to be naked was to be like an animal, and Adam, of course, would not like to be an animal. No man likes it, although every man is.
When for the first time Darwin said that man is a growth, a growth from certain animals, he was opposed vehemently because man has always been thinking himself a descendant of God, just a little bit lower than the angels. And to conceive of the ape as the father was very difficult, in a way impossible. God was the father, and suddenly Darwin changes it: the God is dethroned and apes are enthroned, the ape becomes the father. Even Darwin felt guilty about it; he was a religious man. This was a misfortune that the facts were saying that man has come through animal evolution, he is part of the animal world, he is not something different from animals.
Adam felt ashamed. That shame came because he could now compare himself with animals. In a way he was different, because he was aware. Man clothed himself just to differentiate between animals and himself. And then we are always ashamed about something which looks like animals. The moment someone is doing something like animals, we say, “What are you doing? Are you an animal?” We can condemn anything if we can prove that “this is just like animals.” We condemn sex because it is animalistic. We can condemn anything if somewhere it can be linked with animals.
With awareness came the condemnation, condemnation of the animal. And this condemnation has produced the whole body of suppression, because man is animal. He can go beyond it – that’s another thing – but he belongs to animals. He can transcend, but he comes from the animals. He is an animal. He may not be one day; he can go beyond, but he cannot deny the animal heritage. It is there.
And once this thought came to the human mind, that we are different from animals, then man began to suppress everything in him that was part of his animal heritage. This suppression has created a bifurcation, so every man is two, double. The real, the basic, remains the animal; and the intellectual, the cerebral, goes on thinking in terms of celestial things, abstract, divine. So only a part of your mind is identified by you as yourself, and the whole is denied.
Even in the body we have divisions. The lower body is something condemned. It is not only lower, it is lower in terms of values also. The upper body is not only upper, it is higher. You will feel guilty about your lower body. And if someone says, “Where are you located?” you will point to your head. That is the locus – the cerebral, the head, the intellect. We identify ourselves with the intellect, not with the body. And if someone presses us more, then we will identify ourselves with the upper body, never with the lower. The lower is something condemned.
Why? The body is one. You cannot divide it, there is no division. The head and feet are one, and your brain and your sex organs are one. They function as a unity. But to deny sex, to condemn sex, we condemn the whole lower body.
This shame came to Adam because for the first time he could feel himself different from other animals. And the most animalistic thing – I use the word animalistic in a purely factual way, with no condemnatory tone – the most animalistic thing is bound to appear to be sex, because sex is life and the origin and the source. Adam and Eve became conscious of sex. They tried to hide it – not only outwardly: they tried to hide the very fact even in inner consciousness. That created the division between the conscious and the unconscious mind.
Mind is also one, just like the body is one. But if you condemn something, then that condemned part will become unconscious. You condemn it so much that you yourself become afraid of knowing it, that it exists somewhere within you. You create a barrier, you create a wall, and throw everything that is condemned by you beyond the wall, and then you can forget it. It remains there, it goes on working from there, it remains your master, but yet you can deceive yourself that now it is no more.
That condemned part of our being becomes the unconscious. That’s why we never think that our unconscious is ours. You dream in the night: you dream a very sexual dream, or a violent dream, and you murder someone – you murder your wife. In the morning you feel no guilt; you say it was just a dream. It is not just a dream. Nothing is just something. It was your dream, but it belongs to your unconscious. And in the morning you identify yourself with the conscious, so you say, “It is just a dream. It doesn’t belong to me. It just happened. It is irrelevant, accidental.” You never feel associated with it. But it was your dream and you created it. It was your mind and it was you who did the act. Even in the dream it was you who murdered, who killed or who raped.
Because of this condemnatory phenomenon of consciousness, Adam and Eve became afraid, ashamed of their nakedness. They tried to hide their bodies – not only their bodies, but later on their minds also. So we are also doing the same thing. What is good, what is taken as good by our society, you put it in your conscious; and what is bad, what is condemned by our society as bad, you throw into the unconscious. It becomes a rubbish bag. You go on throwing things into it – it remains there. Deep down in your roots it goes on working. It affects you every moment. Your conscious mind is just impotent against your unconscious, because your conscious mind is just a byproduct of the society, and your unconscious is natural, biological. It has the energy, the force. So you can go on thinking good things, but you will go on doing bad things.
Saint Augustine is reported to have said, “My God, this is the only problem for me: whatsoever I think is worth doing I never do, and whatsoever I know is not to be done I do always.” This is not a problem only for Augustine – it is for everyone who is divided between conscious and unconscious.
With the feeling of shame, Adam was divided into two. He became ashamed of himself, and that part he became ashamed of was cut loose from his conscious mind. Since then man has lived a bifurcated, fragmented life.
And why did he become ashamed? There was no one, no preacher, no religious church, to tell him to be ashamed. The moment you become aware, ego enters in. You become an observer. Without awareness you are just part, part of a great life; you are not different and separate. If a wave in the ocean can become aware, the wave will create an ego different from the ocean that very moment. If the wave becomes aware that “I am,” then the wave can never think itself one with the ocean, one with other waves. It becomes different, separate; ego is created. Knowledge creates the ego.
Children are without egos because they are without knowledge. They are ignorant, and ego cannot come up in ignorance. The more you grow, the more you grow towards ego. Old men have very strengthened, deep-rooted egos. It is natural. Their egos have existed for seventy or eighty years. They have a long history.
If you go back in memory and remember your childhood, you may be surprised to know why you cannot remember, you cannot regress beyond your fourth or third year. You can remember, ordinarily we remember, facts which belong to our fifth year or fourth year, at the most the third year, but the first three years are just vacant. They were there, and many things happened, but why can we not remember? Because the ego was not there it is difficult to remember – because, in a way, you were not, so how can you remember? If you were there you would remember, but you were not. You cannot remember.
Memory exists only after the ego has come into existence, because memory needs a center to hang on. If you are not, where will the memory hang? Three years is a big thing, and for a child every moment is an event. Everything is something phenomenal, nothing is ordinary. So, really, he should remember more of the first years, the first days of life, because everything was colorful, everything was unique. Whatsoever happened was new. But there is no memory of it. Why? The ego was not there and memory needs an ego to hang on.
The moment the child begins to feel himself as separate from others, he will begin to feel shame. He will begin to feel the same shame that came to Adam. He found himself naked – naked like animals, naked like everyone else. You must be different and unique, you must not be like others, only then can you grow in ego.
The first act was to hide the nakedness: he became suddenly different. He was not an animal. Man is born. With Adam, and with Adam’s shame, with Adam’s feeling of shame, man is born. A child is not a man. He becomes a man only when he begins to feel himself separate, different from others, then he becomes an ego.
So, really, it is not religion which gives you the feeling of guilt, it is your ego. Religion exploits it; that’s another matter. Every father exploits it; that is another matter. Every father is saying to his son, “What are you doing, behaving like animals? Don’t laugh, don’t cry! Don’t do this, don’t do that; don’t do this before others! What are you doing? – behaving like animals!” And the child feels that if he is an animal, his ego is hurt. To fulfill his ego he follows, he falls in line.
To be animal is very blissful, because there is a freedom, a deep freedom, to move, to do. But it hurts the ego, so one has to choose. If you choose freedom, then you will be like animals, condemned. In this world and in the other world to come, you will be condemned. You will be thrown into hell. “Be a man. Don’t be like an animal.”
The ego is fed. One begins to live around the ego. Then one begins to act according to what is ego-fulfilling. But you cannot deny nature absolutely. It goes on affecting you. Then one begins to live two lives: one, the pre-Adam life; the other, the after-Adam life. So one begins to live two lives, one begins to live a double-bind existence. Then a face is created to show to the society. One is a private face and one a public face. But you are your private face. And everyone is Adam, naked, animal-like, but you cannot show it to the public. To the public you show the after-Adam face: everything clean, everything fitted to the social norm, everything to show for the others, not the real but the desired, not that which is but that which should be.
So everyone has to go continuously from one face to another. From private to public you are changing every moment. This is a great strain. This dissipates much energy. But what am I saying and what do I mean? I don’t say be like animals; you cannot be now. The forbidden fruit cannot be returned. You have eaten it; it has become your blood and bones. There is no way of throwing it. There is no way to return it and go to God the Father and say, “I return this – this forbidden fruit of knowledge. Forgive me.” There is no way. There is no way to go back. Now it is our blood.
We cannot go back, we can only go forward. There is no going back. We cannot go below knowledge, we can only go beyond knowledge. Only a different innocence is possible – the innocence of total awareness.
There are two types of innocence. One, below knowledge: the childlike, the pre Adam-like, animal-like, below knowledge. You are not, the ego is not, the troublemaker is not. You exist as part of the cosmic whole. You don’t know that you are part. You don’t know that there is a cosmic whole. You know nothing. You exist without knowing. Of course there is no suffering, because suffering is impossible without knowledge. One has to be aware of suffering to suffer it. How can you suffer if you are not aware?
You are being operated upon, a surgeon is operating on you. You suffer if you are conscious. If you are unconscious, there is no suffering. The leg is cut completely, thrown; there is no suffering, because suffering is nowhere recorded, nowhere known, you are unconscious. You cannot suffer in unconsciousness. You can suffer only when you are conscious. The more conscious, the more you will suffer. That’s why the more man grows in knowledge, the more he suffers.
Primitive people cannot suffer so much as you can suffer, not because they are better but because they are ignorant. Villagers, even today, villagers who are not yet part of the modern world, live in a more innocent way. They don’t suffer so much. Because of this, many fallacies have come to the thinkers, to philosophers. For example, Rousseau or Tolstoy or Gandhi: they think because villagers are more blissful it would be good if the whole world became primitive again, went back to the jungle, back to the forest, back to nature. But they are wrong, because the man who has lived in a civilized city will suffer in a village. No villager has suffered that way.
So Rousseau goes on talking about “back to nature” and continues to live in Paris. He himself will never go to the village. He talks about the poetry of village life, of the beauty, of the innocence, but he himself will never go. And if he goes, then he will know that he will suffer as no villager has suffered, because once consciousness is attained you cannot throw it – because it is you. It is not something that you can throw. It is you – how can you throw yourself? Consciousness is you.
Adam suffered shame; he felt his nakedness. Ego is the reason. Adam attained a center, though false, but still a center. Now Adam was different from the whole cosmos. Trees were there, stars were there, everything was there, but Adam was now an island, separate. Now his life was his life, not part of the cosmic whole. And the moment your life is your life, struggle enters. You have to fight inch by inch to exist, to survive.
Animals are not in a struggle. Even if they appear to us, to a Darwin, to be in a struggle, they are not in a struggle. They appear to Darwin to be in a struggle because we go on projecting our own ideas. They cannot be in a struggle. They appear to us to be in a struggle, because for us everything is a struggle. With the ego everything is a struggle. They seem to be fighting to be. They are not fighting to be: they are just flowing in the cosmic unity. Even if they are doing something, there is no doer behind it. It is a natural phenomenon.
A lion killing some victim for his food…there is no doer, there is no violence. It is a simple phenomenon: just hunger after food. There is no hungry one: simple hunger, a mechanism finding the food, no violence. Only man can be violent because only man can be a doer. You can kill without hunger. A lion can never kill without hunger, because hunger kills in a lion, not the lion. A lion can never kill in play. There is nothing like hunting for a lion, it exists only for man. You can kill in play, just for fun. If a lion is satisfied, there is no violence, no play, no game, nothing. It is a hunger phenomenon. The doer is not there.
Nature exists as a deep cosmic flow. In this flow Adam becomes aware of himself, and he becomes aware because he has eaten the forbidden fruit of knowledge. Knowledge was forbidden: “Don’t eat the fruit of the tree of knowledge” was the commandment. He disobeyed it, he couldn’t go back. And the Bible says every man will suffer for Adam’s rebelliousness because in a way every man is an Adam again.
You cannot suffer for it – how can you suffer for something someone else did somewhere? But it is a continuous history repeated every day. Every child has to pass from the Garden of Eden to the expulsion. Every child is born as Adam and then he is expelled. That’s why there is so much nostalgia in poets, in painters, in literary persons, in all those who can manipulate to express. There is a nostalgia always. The golden age was childhood.
Everyone thinks that childhood was something golden, utopian, and everyone longs to go back to it. Even an old man, just on the deathbed, thinks with nostalgia of childhood: of the beauty, of the happiness, of the bliss, of the flowers, of the butterflies, of the dreams, of fairies. Everyone in his childhood is in a wonderland, not only Alice, everyone. This shadow follows….
Why is childhood so beautiful, so blissful? Because you were still a part of the cosmic flow, with no responsibility, with absolute freedom, with no conscience, with no burden. You existed, as if it was not something to be done by you. It was there, taken for granted. And then comes the ego, and then comes the conflict, and the struggle. Then everything becomes a responsibility, and every moment is a bondage, no freedom.
Psychologists say that religions only reflect this nostalgia to be again in childhood. And they go even further: they say ultimately everyone longs to be again in the womb of the mother, because then you were really part of the cosmos. The cosmos was even feeding you. Even to breathe was not for you to do; the mother was breathing for you. You were not aware of the mother, you were not aware of yourself. You were there with no awareness.
The womb is the Garden of Eden. So every man is born as an Adam, and everyone has to eat the forbidden fruit of knowledge, because the moment you grow, you grow in knowledge. That is inevitable. So it is not that Adam rebelled. Rebellion is part of growth. He couldn’t do otherwise: he had to. Every child has to rebel, has to disobey. Life demands it. He has to go further away from the mother, from the father. He will long for it; again and again he will desire and dream, but still he will go further away. This is an inevitable process.
It is asked: “What is the deeper meaning behind this feeling?” This is the meaning: knowledge gives you ego, and ego gives you comparison, judgment, individuality. You cannot think of yourself as an animal, so man has done everything to hide the fact that he is an animal. He has done everything! We are doing things every day to hide the fact that we are animals. But we are. And by hiding the fact, the fact is not destroyed; rather, it becomes a perverted fact.
So whenever that hidden perversion erupts, man proves to be more animalistic than any animal. If you are violent, no animal can compete with you. How? No animal has known anything like Hiroshima, Vietnam. Only man can create a Hiroshima. There is no comparison. All the animals in all the history are just playing with dolls in comparison to Hiroshima. Their violence is nothing. This is accumulated violence – hidden, accumulated. We go on hiding and then we are accumulating. And the more we accumulate, the more ashamed we feel, because we know what is hidden inside. You cannot escape it.
A certain psychologist was experimenting with hidden facts, which, howsoever you try, you cannot hide. For Example, if someone says that he is not attracted to women, he can practice it. He can practice it and he can convince himself and others also that he is not attracted. But Adam is bound to be attracted to Eve, Eve is bound to be attracted to Adam. That is part of their nature, unless one goes beyond, unless one becomes a buddha.
But then Buddha never says, “I am not attracted to women,” because even to say that, you have to think in terms of attraction and repulsion. He will not say, “I am repelled by women,” because you cannot be repelled by anything unless you are attracted. If you ask him he will simply say, “Men and women, both have become irrelevant to me. I am neither. If I am man, then woman will be there hidden somewhere. If I am woman, then man will be there hidden somewhere.”
One psychologist just recently experimented with a man who said, “I am not attracted to women.” And he was not, as far as outward things go. He was never seen to be attracted to anyone. Then this psychologist showed him some pictures, ten pictures, of different things, only one picture of a naked woman.
The psychologist was not seeing what picture the man was seeing. He was just looking in his eyes; the back of the picture was in front of the psychologist. He would show a picture to the man and just look in his eyes. And he said, “If you are not attracted…. I will tell you when you are seeing the naked woman just by seeing your eyes. I am not seeing the pictures.”
The pictures were shown, and with that very picture the psychologist said, “Now you are seeing the naked woman,” because the moment a naked woman is there, the eyes extend. And that is involuntary; you cannot control it. You cannot do anything. It is a reflex action. Eyes are made that way biologically. The man says that “I am not attracted,” but this is only his conscious mind. The unconscious is attracted all the same.
And when you hide certain facts and they go on manipulating you, you become more and more ashamed. The higher a civilization, the higher its culture, the more ashamed the human being will be – the more ashamed. Really, the more ashamed you are about sex, the more civilized you are. But then civilized man is bound to be insane, schizophrenic, divided. This division starts with Adam.
“And, secondly, it has been said that the forbidden fruit of the tree of knowledge is knowledge of sex. What is your view about this?”
Of course, it is. But not only that: sex is the first knowledge and sex is also the last knowledge. When you enter humanity, the first thing you begin to feel and be aware of is sex. And the last thing, when you go beyond humanity, is again sex – the last thing and the first. Because sex is the most foundational, it is bound to be the first. It is the alpha and the omega.
A child is just a child unless he becomes sexually mature. The moment he becomes sexually mature, he is a man. With sexual maturity, the whole world becomes different. It is not the same world, because your approach, your outlook, your way of seeing things, changes. When you begin to be aware of the woman, you begin to be a man.
Really, in old biblical texts, knowledge is used in the Hebrew language with a sexual meaning. For example, in such sentences: “He didn’t know his wife for two years,” or, “She didn’t know her husband for two years,” it means there was no sexual relationship for two years. “He knew his wife for the first time on that day”: it means there was a sexual relationship for the first time. Knowledge in Hebrew is used for sexual knowledge, so it is right that Adam became aware of sex then.
Sex is most foundational. Without sex there is no life. Life exists because of sex and life disappears with sex. That’s why Buddha and Mahavira say unless you go beyond sex you will be born again and again. You cannot go beyond life, because with a sexual desire inside you will be born again. So sex is not only giving birth to someone else; ultimately, it is giving birth to yourself also. It works in a double way. You reproduce someone through sex, but that is not so important. Because of your sexual desire, you are reborn; you reproduce yourself again and again.
Adam became aware of his sex; that was the first awareness. But with sex it is only a beginning. Then everything else will follow.
Really, psychologists say that every curiosity is sexual in a way. So if a person is born impotent, he will not be curious about anything – not even about truth, because curiosity of any type is basically sexual. To discover something hidden, to know something which is not known, to know the unknown, is sexual. Children will play with each other to find out the hidden parts of the body. That is the beginning of curiosity and the beginning of all science: to find out that which is hidden, that which is not known.
So really it happens that the more sexual a person is, the more inventive he can be. The more sexual a person is, the more intelligent. With less sex energy, less intelligence exists; with more sexual energy, more intelligence, because sex is a deep search to uncover, not only bodies, not only the opposite sex body, but everything that is hidden.
So if a society is very sex-condemnatory, it can never be scientific, because then you condemn curiosity. The East could not be scientific because of so much antagonism toward sex. And the West also could not be scientific as long as Christianity retained its hold. It was only when the Vatican disappeared, when Rome was not significant at all, only within these three hundred years when the palace of Christianity came down and disappeared, that the West could be scientific. The release of sexual energy also became a release into research. A sexually free society will be scientific, and a sexually prohibitive society will be nonscientific.
With sex everything begins to be alive. If your child, when he attains maturity, sexual maturity, begins to behave rebelliously, forgive him. It is but natural. With a new energy coming into his veins, with new life running, he is bound to be rebellious. That rebellion is just part of it. He is also bound to be inventive. He will invent new things, new ways, new styles, new manners of life, new societies. He will dream new dreams, he will think about new utopias. If you condemn sex, then there is no rebellion of youth. All over the world, the rebellion of youth is part of a sexual freedom.
In the old cultures there was no rebellion because sex was so much condemned, the energy was so much suppressed. With that energy suppressed, every rebellion is suppressed. If you give freedom to sex energy, every rebellion will be there, every type of rebellion will be there.
Knowledge in itself has a sexual dimension, so it is right in a way that Adam became aware of sex, the dimension of sex. But with that dimension of sex he became aware of many other things also. This whole expansion of knowledge, this explosion of knowledge, this probing into the unknown, this going to the moon and to other planets, it is a sexual thirst. And the West will go further and further into knowledge, because now the energy is released, and now the energy will take new shapes, new adventures.
With sex and the awareness of sex, Adam started on a long journey. We are on it, everyone is on it, because sex is not just a part of your body – it is you. You are born of sex and you will die of sex, exhausted. Your birth is the birth of sex, and your death is the death of sex. So the moment you feel that the sexual energy is waning, know that death is coming near.
Thirty-five is the peak age. Sex energy is at the peak, and then everything declines, then one begins to be old, on the downward path. Seventy will be the death age. If fifty can be the peak of sexual energy, then a hundred will be the death age. The West will soon attain a hundred years as a normal, average age, because now a fifty-year-old man is behaving like a boy. It is good, it shows an alive society. It shows that now life will be lengthened.
If a hundred-year-old man can behave like a playboy, then life will be lengthened to two hundred years – because sex is the energy. Because of sex you are young and because of sex you will be old. Because of sex you are born and because of sex you will die. And not only that: Buddha and Mahavira and Krishna, they say that because of sexual desire you will be born again. Not only is this body run by sex, but all your bodies in continuity are run by sexual desire.
Of course, when Adam became conscious for the first time, he became conscious of sex. That is the most foundational fact. But this was misinterpreted by Christianity, and then much nonsense followed. It was said: Because Adam became aware of his sex and felt ashamed, sex is bad and a sin, original sin. It is not. It is original life. He became ashamed, not because sex is bad: he became ashamed because he saw that sex is an animal affair and “I am not an animal.” So sex has to be fought, cut, and thrown. Somehow one has to become without sex. This is a misinterpretation, the Christian interpretation of the parable: “So fight against sex.” Religion became just a fight against sex. And if religion is a fight against sex, then religion is a fight against life.
To me, religion is not a fight against sex. Rather, it is an effort to go beyond, not against. If you are against, you will remain on the same level with sex. Then you can never go beyond. So Christian mystics and saints, they are fighting to their deathbed against sex. And the temptation comes, and every moment they are tempted. There is no one to tempt them…their own suppression. Their own suppression is the creation of their temptation. They live in a very tortured world of inner mind where they are constantly fighting with themselves.
Religion is to go beyond, not against. And if you want to go beyond, you have to step, to use sex energy to transcend it. You have to move with it, not fight with it. You have to know it more. To be ignorant now is impossible – you have to know it more. Knowledge is freedom. If you know it more and more and more, and a moment comes when you are totally aware, sex disappears. In that total awareness, the energy is transformed, mutated. You now have a different dimension of the same energy.
Sex is horizontal. When you are totally aware, sex becomes vertical. And that vertical movement of sex is kundalini. If sex moves horizontally, then you go on reproducing others and reproducing yourself. If the energy begins to move upward, vertically, you just go out – out of the wheel of existence, as the Buddhists say, out of the wheel of life. It is a new birth: not in a new body, but in a new dimension of existence. This Buddhists have called nirvana, or moksha, or whatsoever you like to call it you can call it. Names don’t mean much.
So there are two ways. Adam becomes aware of his sex. He can suppress it; then he will move horizontally, fighting with it, in a constant anguish, always knowing the animal is hidden inside and always pretending that it is not there. This is the anguish. And one can move horizontally for lives together, reaching nowhere, because it is a repetitive circle. That’s why we call it a wheel, a repetitive circle.
You can jump out of the wheel. That jumping will not be through suppression; it will be through more knowledge. So I will say: you have eaten the fruit of the forbidden tree – now eat the whole tree! That is the only way. Now eat the whole tree. Don’t leave even a single leaf. Let there be no tree. Eat it totally. Only then will you be freed of knowledge, never before.
And with that, when I say eat the whole tree, I mean: now, when you have become aware, be aware totally. Fragmentary awareness is the problem. Either be totally ignorant or be totally aware. Totality is bliss. Be totally ignorant – you are in bliss. You will not be aware of it, but you will be in bliss. Just as we are when we are deep asleep, not even dreaming, simply asleep, with no movement of the mind – you are in bliss, but you cannot feel it. You can say in the morning that the night’s sleep was very blissful, but it was not felt when the sleep was there. It is felt only when you have come out of it. When knowledge enters, awareness comes, you can say the night was very blissful.
Either be totally ignorant, which is impossible, or be totally knowing, which is possible. With totality there is bliss. Totality is bliss. So eat the tree, root and all, and be aware. This is what is meant by an awakened man, a buddha, an enlightened man: he has eaten the whole tree. Now nothing is left to be aware. A simple awareness exists.
This simple awareness is a re-entry into Eden. You cannot find the old gate again; it is missed forever. You can find a new gate; you can enter again. And, really, whatsoever the Devil promised to Adam will be fulfilled: you will be like gods. He was right in a way. If you eat the fruit of knowledge, you will be like gods.
We cannot conceive this in this state of mind, because we are just in a hell; because of this Devil’s temptation, we are in a hell. We are as if suspended in between two things, always divided, in agony, in anguish. It seems that the Devil deceived Adam, deceived us. This is not the whole thing; the story is incomplete. You can complete it, and only then can you judge whether whatsoever the Devil said was right or not. Eat the whole tree, and you will be like gods.
A person who has become totally aware is divine, he is not human. Humanity is a sort of disease. I say dis-ease, a continuous dis-ease. Either be like animals, you are healthy; or be like gods, you are healthy – healthy because whole, a wholeness.
The English word holy is good. It doesn’t mean only pure; really it means to be whole. And unless you are whole you cannot be holy. Be whole. And there are only two types of wholeness: one, the animal type; the other, the godlytype.

Osho,
You said that awareness creates centering and crystallization, but I personally feel that awareness brings a feeling of deep void within me. Please explain the relationship between centering and inner void.
As man is, he is without a center, without a real, authentic center. He has a center, so to speak, but the center is false. He only thinks that he has a center. The ego is a false center. You feel that it is there, but it is not. If you go to find it, you will not find it at all.

Bodhidharma reached China one thousand years after Buddha. He was a buddha himself. The Emperor Wu came to receive Bodhidharma. The emperor, when no one was there, asked Bodhidharma, “I am very, very disturbed. My mind is never at ease, so what can I do? Tell me. Make my mind at peace, at ease. I am a deep conflict, an inner struggle, continuous, so do something!”
Bodhidharma said, “I will! Come in the morning, early, at four o’clock – but remember to bring your self.”
The Emperor Wu felt that “Either this man is mad or I have not understood what he is saying.” He said, “Of course, when I come I will come with my self.”
Bodhidharma still insisted, “Don’t forget! Bring your self with you. Otherwise, whom am I going to make at ease?”
The whole night Emperor Wu couldn’t sleep. It was such a strange thing. It looked weird. What does this man mean? And then he began to feel doubtful whether to go or not, and at this early hour, four o’clock in the morning. And Bodhidharma has said, “Come alone! Only let your self be with you, no one else. So no one knows what he is going to do, and he looks mad. It is even dangerous.” But, still, he was tempted. This man was really a different type of being. He attracted, he was magnetic.
So he couldn’t stay at home. He came. When he was coming near, Bodhidharma said, “You have come, but where is your self?”
Wu said, “You make me puzzled. The whole night I couldn’t sleep. What do you mean by ‘my self’? I am here.”
So Bodhidharma said, “Give me your self. I will make it silent, at peace, at ease. Close your eyes and find out where it is, your self. Point it out to me and I will make it totally disappear, and there will never be any problem again.”
So Emperor Wu closed his eyes, sat before Bodhidharma. The morning was absolutely silent. No one was there. He could hear his own breath, he could hear his own heartbeat. And Bodhidharma was there constantly telling him, “Go in and find out where it is. If you cannot point it out, then what can I do?”
And he searched and he searched and he searched, for hours together. Then he opened his eyes…he was a different man. He said, “I don’t find it anywhere. It is all void. There is no self.”
Bodhidharma said, “Then, if there is no self and all is void, are you disturbed now? Is someone at dis-ease inside? Now where is the anguish you were talking about, so much talking about? Where is it?”
So Wu said, “Nowhere, because the person has disappeared, so how can the dis-ease exist without him? I tried and tried, but it is nowhere to be found. Really, I was myself in a deception. I always thought I am inside. I tried to find it and it is not there. There is simply a void, a shunya, emptiness, a nothingness.”
So Bodhidharma said, “Now go home, and whenever you feel that something is to be done with your self, first find out where it is.”

It is a false entity. Because we have never searched for it, it seems to exist. Because we have never gone in, we go on talking about the I. It is not there. So the first thing to be understood is: if you meditate, if you become silent, you will feel a void, because you cannot find the ego. The ego was all the furniture; now the furniture has disappeared. You are just a room – rather, a roominess. Even the walls have disappeared; they were part of the ego. The whole structure has disappeared, so you will find a void.
This is the first step. When the ego disappears…. It is a false entity. It is not there. It only appears to be, or you go on thinking that it is there. It belongs to your thinking, not to your being. It belongs to your mind, not to your existence. Because you think it is there, it is there. When you go to find it, it is not found. Then you feel the void, emptiness. Now persist in this emptiness, remain in this void.
Mind is very cunning. He can play games. If you observe this voidness, and if you begin to think, you will fill it again. Even if you say, “This is void,” you are out of it, already out of it. The void has disappeared, you have come in. Remain with the void, remain void. Don’t think. It is difficult, very frightening. One gets dizzy. It is an abyss, an infinite abyss. Falling down and falling down, and with no bottom to reach, one gets dizzy…one begins to think. The moment you think, you have found the ground again. Now you are not in the void.
If you can be in the void without escaping it by any thinking whatsoever, suddenly the void will also disappear, as the ego has disappeared – because, really, it is because of the ego that it looks like a void. Ego was the thing which was filling. That was the furniture, and there was no void. Now the ego has disappeared; that’s why you feel it as a void. This feeling of emptiness is just because something that was always there is not there.
If you see me in this chair, and suddenly you don’t find me in the chair, the chair will look empty – not because the chair is empty, but simply because someone was there filling it and now he is no longer there. So you see the void, not the chair. You see the void because the absence of something looks like emptiness. You are still not seeing the chair. You were seeing a person there, now you are seeing the absence of the person, but the chair is still not seen.
So when the ego disappears, you feel the void. This is only a beginning, because this void is also the negative part of the ego, the other aspect. This void also must disappear.

It is reported about Rinzai, a Zen master, that when he was learning with his teacher, the teacher always insisted on attaining the void, the nothingness, the shunya. So one day he came: he had attained it. It was a long effort; to dissolve the ego is a long effort. It was a long journey, difficult, sometimes virtually impossible, but he had attained it. So he came, laughing, dancing, happy, in ecstasy. He fell down at his master’s feet and said, “I have attained. Now the void is there!”
The master looked at him very unsympathetically and said, “Now go and throw this void out too. Don’t bring it here. Throw this void out too. Throw away this nothingness.”
Because if you have nothingness, it becomes something again. Even a void is something. If you can feel it, it is something. If you can know it, it is something. If you can observe it, it is something. Even nothing becomes a something if it is in your hands.
The master said, “Throw this void out. Only come to me when even nothingness is not there.”
So Rinzai wept.

Why couldn’t he see it himself? If void is an attainment, it is something. If you have achieved nothingness, nothingness becomes a thing. When you go deep in the void, without any thinking, without any vibration in the mind, if you remain in this, suddenly the void just disappears – and then the self is known. Then you are centered. Then you have come to the real center.
The false center, the absence of the false center, and then the real center. By “centering” I mean the ground, the very ground of being. It is not your center, because you are the false; so it is not your center, it is the center, just the center of being, the very existence centered in it.
You are the false center, you will disappear. But even in your disappearance, if you begin to feel fulfilled with the void, the ego has returned in a very subtle way. In a very subtle way it has come back. It will say, “I have attained this void.” It is still there.
Don’t allow it to come back. Remain in the void. Don’t do anything with the void – not even thinking about it, not even feeling about it. The void is there. Be at ease, let it be there. It will disappear. It is just a negative part. The real thing has disappeared; it is just the shadow. Don’t catch the shadow, don’t cling to the shadow, because the shadow can remain only if the real thing is somewhere near. Only then can the shadow remain.
The void disappears ultimately, and then there is centering. Then for the first time you are not and you are, not as you but as pure being, rather, as the all. And this point must be noted carefully: that it is not your center, it is the center of all.
Forget your false center. Go in, dig for it – it dissolves. It is never found. It is not, so you cannot find it. Then a more arduous thing befalls you: then you encounter the void. It is very silent. Compared to the ego world, it is very silent, very silent. You are in a deep peace. But don’t be satisfied with it. It is false, because it is part of the ego. And if you feel satisfied the ego will re-enter, it will come back. A part of it was still there. That part will bring it back again, whole.
Remain with the void without any thinking. That is just deathlike. One is dying before one’s own eyes, everything dissolving, a great abyss. And soon you will disappear, only the abyss will be there – not even the knower of the abyss, not even the observer of the abyss, just the abyss. Then you are centered, centered in the cosmic center. It is not your center, but for the first time you are.
Now language will have a different meaning. You are not and you are. Here, no and yes lose their traditional difference, the customary meaning. You are not as you, you are now as divine, as the cosmos itself. This is the existential centering, centered in existence.

============================================================

Chidaditya swaroopam deepah.

To be established in the sun of awareness is the only lamp.
One day a lady came to Mulla Nasruddin’s school with her small son. The lady asked the Mulla to frighten the boy. He had become unruly and he would not listen to anyone. He needed to be frightened by some big authority. Of course, Mulla was a big authority in his village. Mulla took a very frightening posture, with eyes bulging, fiery, and he began to jump. The lady felt that “Now it seems impossible to stop the Mulla. He may even kill the boy!”
The lady fainted, the boy escaped, and Mulla became so frightened of himself that he had to run out of the school. He waited outside. When the lady came back he entered, slowly, solemnly, seriously. The lady said, “Mulla, it is strange. I never asked you to frighten me.”
Mulla said, “You don’t see the real fact. It was not only you that was frightened – I myself was frightened of myself. When fear takes over, it strikes all. To start it is easy, but to control it is difficult. So I was the master when I started, but soon fear took over and it became the master and I was just a slave. I couldn’t do anything. And, moreover, fear has no favorites. When it strikes, it strikes all.”

This is a beautiful parable, one which shows a very deep insight into the human mind. You are conscious in everything just in the beginning, and then the unconscious takes over. The unconscious takes charge and the unconscious becomes the master. You can start anger, but you never end it; rather, the anger ends you. You can start anything, but sooner or later the unconscious takes charge; you are relieved of your duty. So only the beginning is in your hands, never the end. And you are not the master of the consequences that follow.
This is natural because only a very small fragment of the mind is aware. It works just like the starter in your motor car. It starts, and then it is of no use; then the motor takes over. It is needed only to start. Without it, it is difficult to start. But don’t go on thinking that because you start a certain thing you are the master.
This is the secret of this parable. Because you start, you begin to feel that you are the master – because you started. You think you can stop. You could have not started, that’s another thing. But once started, soon the voluntary becomes nonvoluntary and the conscious becomes unconscious, because the conscious is just the upper layer, just the surface of the mind, and the whole mind is unconscious. You start, and the unconscious begins to move and work.
So Mulla said, “I am not responsible for what has happened. I am not responsible. I am responsible only for starting, and it is you who told me to start it. I started to frighten the boy, then the boy was frightened, then you fainted, then I was frightened, and then everything was a mess.” Everything is a mess in our life also.
This conscious starting and this unconscious taking it over every time, if you don’t feel it, if you don’t realize it, this mechanism, you will always be a slave. And the slavery becomes more convenient if you go on thinking that you are the master. It is difficult to be a slave knowing that you are a slave. It is easy to be a slave when you go on deceiving yourself that you are the master. Your love, your anger, your greed, your jealousy, your violence, your cruelty, even your sympathy, your compassion – I say “your” – are yours only in the beginning, just for a moment, just a spark. Then your mechanism is started. And your whole mechanism is unconscious.
Why is this so? Why this conflict between the conscious and the unconscious? And there is a conflict, because you cannot predict even yourself. Even you, your acts, are unpredictable to you, because you don’t know what is going to happen, you don’t know what you are going to do. The next moment what you will do even you are not aware of, because the doer is deep in darkness. You are not the doer. You are only a starting point. Unless your whole mechanism becomes conscious, you will be a problem to yourself, and a hell, and nothing but a long misery.
Only in two ways, as I have been emphasizing every day, can one become whole. Either lose this fragmentary consciousness, throw this fragment of the mind which has become conscious into the dark unconscious, dissolve it, and you are whole…. But then you are just like an animal, and that is impossible. Whatsoever you may do, it is not possible. It is only conceivable, but not possible. You will be thrown forward again and again.
That small part which has become conscious cannot now become unconscious. It is just like an egg which has become a hen: now the hen cannot move back to be an egg again. A seed which has sprouted, has begun the journey to be a tree, now cannot go back and regress and become a seed. The child which has come out of the womb of his mother now cannot go back, howsoever pleasant the womb may be, but there is no backward-going.
Life moves always in the future, never in the past. Only man can think of the past. That’s why I say it is conceivable, but it cannot be actualized. You can imagine, you can think to go back, you can believe, you can try to go back, but you cannot go. That is an impossibility.
One has to move forward. Knowingly, unknowingly, one is moving every moment. If you move knowingly, then the speed is accelerated. If you move knowingly, then you don’t waste energy and time. Then the thing can happen even in one life which will not happen in a million lives if you just move unknowingly, because if you move unknowingly you move in a circle. Every day you repeat the same, in every life you repeat again the same. And life becomes just a habit, a mechanical habit, a repetition. Knowingly if you break the repetitive habit, there is a breakthrough.
So the first thing to know towards awareness is: you are aware in such a small measure that your awareness works only as a starter. Unless you have more awareness than unawareness, more consciousness than unconsciousness, the balance will not change. And what are the hindrances? Why is this the situation? Why this facticity? Why this conflict between conscious and unconscious? We should consider it.
It is natural. Whatsoever is is natural. Man has evolved through millions of years. This evolution has created you, your body, your mechanism. This evolution has been a long struggle, millions and millions of experiences – of failures, of successes. Your body has learned much; your body has been continuously learning things. Your body knows much, and its knowledge is fixed. It goes on repeating its own ways of behaving. Even if the situation has changed, the body remains the same.
For example, when you feel anger you feel it in the same way as any primitive man, you feel it in the same way as any animal, you feel it in the same way as any child. And this is the mechanism: when you feel anger your body has a fixed routine ritual, a routine work to do. The moment your mind says “Anger!” you have glands which begin to release chemicals into the blood. Adrenaline is released into the blood. It is a necessity, because in anger you will have to strike or you may be struck by your opponent. You will need more blood circulation; this chemical will help more circulation. You may need to fight, or you may need to escape from the situation, to run away. In both cases, this chemical will help.
So when some animal is angry, the body begins to be ready to fight or to take flight. And these are the two alternatives: if the animal feels that he is stronger than the opponent, he will fight; if he feels that he is not the stronger one, he will escape. And the mechanism works very smoothly.
But for man the situation has become totally different. When you feel anger, you may not even express it. That is impossible for the animal. It depends on the situation. If it is your servant, then you may express it. If it is your master, then you may not express it. Not only that: you may even laugh, smile; you may even persuade your master, your boss, that not only are you not angry, but you are very happy. Now you are confusing the whole mechanism of the body. The body is ready to fight, and now you are smiling. You are creating a mess in the body. The body cannot understand you: “What are you doing? Are you mad? Do two things which are natural: fight or escape.”
This smiling is something new. This deception is something new. The body has no mechanism for it, so you have to force the smile without the chemicals flowing in which help to smile, which help to laugh. No chemicals to laugh…you have to force a smile, a false smile. And the body has released chemicals into the blood – now what will the body do? The body has a language that it understands very well, but you are behaving in a very mad, insane way. Now there is a gap created between you and your body.
This mechanism is unconscious, this mechanism is nonvoluntary. Your volition, your will is not needed, because will takes time and there are situations when no time can be lost. A tiger has attacked you: now there is no time for mentation. You cannot contemplate what to do. You have to act without the mind. If mind comes in you are lost. You cannot think. You cannot say to the tiger, “Wait! Let me think about it, what to do.” You have to act immediately, without any consciousness.
So the body has a mechanism. The tiger is there: the mind just knows the tiger is there – body begins to work. That working is not dependent on the mind, because mind is a very slow worker, very inefficient. It cannot be relied upon in emergency situations, so body begins to work. You will run away. You are frightened, you will escape.
But the same thing happens when you are standing on a platform to address a big audience. There is no tiger, but you are frightened by the great gathering. Fear takes shape; the body is informed. That information is automatic, that you are in fear. The body begins to release chemicals – the same chemicals it will release when a tiger attacks you. There is no tiger, there is no one who is really attacking you. But an audience is a deep attack: everyone, really, is aggressive. That’s why you have become afraid.
Now the body is ready to fight or take flight, but both the alternatives are closed. You have to stand there and speak. Now your body begins to perspire, even on a cold night. Why? Because the body is ready to run or to fight. The blood is circulating more, heat is created, and you are standing there. So you begin to perspire, and then a subtle trembling takes over. Your whole body begins to tremble.
It is just the same if you start a car and press the accelerator and the brake both, simultaneously. The engine will be heated, raced, and you are braking also. The whole body of the car will tremble. The same happens when you are standing on a platform. You feel fear. The body is ready to run, the accelerator is pushed, but you cannot run. You have to address the gathering. You are a leader or something; you cannot run. You have to face them, and you have to be there standing on the platform. You have to take the floor.
Now you are doing two things simultaneously, very contradictory. You are also pressing the brake: “Don’t run!” And the body is ready to run. You begin to tremble, heat is created. Now your body feels, “How are you behaving?” The body cannot understand you. A gap is created. The unconscious goes on doing something else and the conscious goes on doing something else. You are divided. This gap has to be understood deeply. In our every act this gap is there.
You are looking at a film, an erotic film: your sex is aroused. Your body is ready to explode in a sexual experience, but you are just seeing a film, just sitting in your chair – and your body is ready for a sexual act. And the film will go on accelerating, it will go on pushing you. You are aroused, and you cannot do anything. The body is ready to do something and the situation is not. A gap is created. You begin to feel yourself different, and there is a barrier between you and your body. Because of that barrier and because of this constant arousal and suppression simultaneously, this acceleration and braking simultaneously, this constant contradiction in your existence, you are diseased.
Either fall back, be an animal…which is impossible. Then you will be whole and healthy. This is a strange fact: animals are not ill in their natural state, but put them in a zoo and they begin to imitate human diseases. No animal is homosexual in its natural surrounding and state. Put animals into a zoo and they begin to behave absurdly – they begin to behave homosexually. No animal goes insane naturally, but in a zoo animals go mad.
It has never been reported in the whole history of human understanding that any animal ever committed suicide, but in a zoo animals commit suicide. This is strange, but not strange really, because the moment man begins to force animals into a life which is not natural, they become divided inside. A division is created, a gap is created, the wholeness is lost.
And man is divided. Man is born divided. So what to do? How not to create this gap and how to bring awareness to every cell of the body, to every nook and corner of your being? How to bring awareness? That’s the only problem for all religions, for all yoga, and for all systems of enlightenment: how to bring consciousness to your total being so that nothing is unconscious.
Many methods have been tried, many methods are possible, so I will talk about some methods for how even the very cells of your body can become aware. And unless you as a total being become aware, you cannot be in bliss, you cannot be at peace. You will continue to be a madhouse.
Each cell of your body affects you. It has its own working, it has its own learning, its own conditioning. The moment you start, the cell takes over and begins to behave in its own way. Then you are disturbed: “What is happening? I never intended this. I never thought about this.” And you are right! Your desires may have been completely different. But once you give your cells, your body, something to do, it is going to do it in its own way, in its own learned way. Because of this, scientists, particularly Russian scientists, think that we cannot change man unless we change the cells.
There is a school, a behavioristic school of psychologists, which thinks that Buddha is a failure, that Jesus is a failure: “They are bound to be failures. There is nothing strange in it, because without changing the very structure of the body, the chemical structure of the body, nothing can be changed.”
These behaviorists – Watson, Pavlov, Skinner – they say, “If Buddha is silent, it only means that somehow he has a different chemical constitution and nothing else. If he is silent, if peace surrounds him, if he is never disturbed, never angry, it only shows that somehow the chemicals are lacking which create disturbance, which create anger.”
So Skinner says, “Sooner or later we will be able to create buddhas chemically. There is no need of any meditation, there is no need of becoming more aware. The only need is to change chemicals.”
And in a way he is right, but very dangerously right, because if certain chemicals are put out of your body, your behavior will change. If certain hormones are introduced into your body, your behavior will change. You are a man and you behave like a man. It is not you who behave like a man, it is only the hormones in you which behave like a man. If those hormones are changed and other hormones are introduced which belong to the feminine structure, you will behave like a woman. So really it is not your behavior, it is hormonal behavior. It is not you who are angry, but a certain hormone in you. It is not that you are silent and meditative, it is a certain hormone in you.
Skinner says, “That’s why Buddha is a failure, because he goes on talking about things which are irrelevant. You say to a man, ‘Don’t be angry,’ and he is filled with chemicals, hormones, which create anger.” So for a behaviorist, “It is just like a person has a high fever, a hundred-and-six-degree fever, and you go on saying beautiful things to him. You say, ‘Be silent, meditate. Don’t get feverish.’ It looks absurd. What can the man do? Unless you change something in his body, the fever will remain. Fever is created by a certain virus, certain chemical things. Unless that is changed, unless the proportion is changed, he will remain feverish. And there is no need to talk…it is absolutely absurd!”
It is the same with anger for Skinner, for Pavlov; the same is with sex. “You go on talking about brahmacharya, celibacy, et cetera, and the body is filled with sex energy, sex cells. That sex energy is not dependent on you; rather, you are dependent on that energy. So go on talking about brahmacharya – nothing is possible with these talks.”
And they are right in a way, but still only in a way. They are right: if the chemicals are changed, if every sex hormone is thrown out of your body, you will not be able to be sexual. But you will not become a buddha. You will be simply impotent – simply impotent, incapable. You will lack something.
Buddha is not lacking something. Rather, on the contrary, something new has come to his life. It is not that he has no sex hormones – they are there. So what has happened to him? His consciousness has deepened, and the consciousness has entered even the sex cells. Now the sex cells are there, but they cannot behave independently. Unless the center orders them to act, they cannot act. They will remain inactive.
In an impotent person sex cells are not there. In a buddha they are there, and more strong than an ordinary person’s – stronger because never used, unused. Energy is accumulated in them, bubbling with energy, but consciousness has penetrated into the cells. Now the consciousness is not only a starting point but it has become the master.
Skinner may prevail in the coming days. He may become a very great force. Just like Marx suddenly became a great force for the outer economy of society, just like Marx, any day Pavlov and Skinner can become a very central force for the inner economy of the human body and the human mind. And they can prove it: whatsoever they say they can prove. But the phenomenon has two aspects.
You see an electric bulb. If you destroy the bulb, the light will disappear – not that the electricity has disappeared. You put off the current, the bulb is there, intact, but the light will disappear. So the light can disappear in two ways. Destroy the bulb: electricity will be there, but because there is no medium to express it, it cannot become light. If your sex cells are destroyed, sexuality will be in you but with no medium to express. This is one way.
Skinner has experimented with many animals. Just by operating on a particular gland, a ferocious dog becomes buddhalike. He sits silently, as if in meditation. You cannot tempt him to be ferocious again. Whatsoever you do, he will look at you without any anger – not that the dog has become a buddha, not that the inner mind has disappeared. It is there the same, but the medium is absent through which the anger can be expressed. This is impotency. The medium has disappeared, not the desire. But if the medium is destroyed, when the bulb is not, you can say, “Where is your light and where is your electricity?” It is there, now hidden.
Religions have been working from the other corner…not to destroy the bulb. That is stupid, because if you destroy the bulb then you will not even be aware of the current running behind. Change the current, transform the current, let the current move in a new dimension, and the bulb will be there intact, alive, but with no light.
Skinner, I say, can prevail, because he shows a very easy way. You are angry? You can be operated upon. You feel sexual? You can be operated upon. Your problems will be solved, but not by you – by a surgeon, by someone else. And whenever a problem is solved by someone else, you have missed a very great opportunity, because when you solve it you grow. When someone else solves it, you remain the same. The problem can be solved through the body; there will be no problems, but you will also no longer be a human being.
The religious emphasis is on transformation of the consciousness. And the first thing is to create a greater force of awareness inside so that that awareness can spread.
This sutra is beautiful. It says:
To be established in the sun of awareness is the only lamp.
The sun is very, very far away. The light takes ten minutes to travel to the earth, and the light travels very fast – 186,000 miles per second. It takes ten minutes for the sun to reach the earth; it is very, very far. But in the morning the sun rises, and it reaches even to the flower in your garden. The word reach has a different meaning; just the rays reach, not the sun.
So if your energy becomes a sun deep inside at the center, a solar center, if you become aware, centrally aware, and if your awareness grows, then your rays of awareness reach to every part of the body, to every cell. Then your awareness penetrates every cell of the body.
It is just like when the sun rises in the morning and everything begins to be alive on the earth, suddenly. Suddenly there is life. Sleep disappears, the monotonous night disappears. Suddenly everything begins to be reborn. The birds begin to sing and they are again on the wing, and the flowers flower, and everything is alive again. Just the touch, just the warmth!
So when you have a central consciousness, awareness in you, it begins to reach to every pore, nook and corner; to every cell it penetrates. And you have many, many cells – sixty trillion cells in your body. You are a big city, a big nation. Sixty trillion cells, and now they are all unconscious. Your consciousness has never reached them. Grow in this consciousness and every cell is penetrated. And the moment your consciousness touches a cell, it is different. The very quality changes.
A man is asleep. The sun rises, and the man is awakened. Is he the same man who was asleep? Are sleep and awakening the same? There was a bud, closed, dead, and the sun has risen, and the bud opens and becomes a flower. Is this flower the same? Something new has penetrated. The aliveness, the capacity to grow and blossom, has appeared. The bird was just asleep, as if dead, as if just dead matter. Now the sun has come up and the bird is on the wing. Is it the same bird? It is a different phenomenon. Something has touched…and the bird has become alive. Everything was silent, and now everything is singing. The morning is a song.
The same phenomenon happens inside the cells of a buddha body. It is known as buddhakaya, the body of the buddha. It is a different body. It is not the same body as you have, not even the same body as Gautama had before he became Buddha.

Buddha is just on the verge of death and someone asks him, “Are you dying? Then where will you be?”
Buddha says, “The body that was born will die. But there is another body – buddhakaya, the body of the buddha – which is neither born nor can die. But I have left that body that was given to me, that came to me from my parents. I have left it long ago. Just as a snake leaves the old body every year, I have left it. This is a buddhakaya, a buddha body.”

What does this mean? Your body can become a buddha body. When your consciousness reaches to every cell, the very quality of your being changes, is transmuted, because then every cell is alive, conscious, enlightened. And now there is no slavery. You have become the master. Just by becoming a conscious center, you become a master.
This sutra says: To be established in the sun of awareness is the only lamp. So why are you taking this earthen lamp to the temple? Take the inner lamp. Why are you burning these candles on the altar? They will not help. Kindle the inner candle, become a buddha body – let your every cell become conscious. Don’t allow any part of your being to remain unconscious.
Buddhists have preserved some bones of Buddha. People think that they are just superstitious. They are not, because they are not ordinary bones. They are not. The cells, the particles, the electrons of those bones, have known something which happens rarely. In Kashmir, in a mosque, one hair of Mohammed is preserved. That is no ordinary hair. It is not just superstitious – that hair has known something.
Just try to understand it in this way: a flower which has never known any sunrise, and a flower which has known, encountered the sun, are not the same, cannot be the same. The flower that has never known a sunrise has never known a life arise in it, because it arises with the sun arising. That flower is just dead – a potentiality. It has never known its own spirit. A flower which has seen the sun rise has also seen something rise in itself. It has known a soul. Now the flower is not just a flower, it has known a deep stirring inside. Something has stirred, something has become alive in it.
So the hair of Mohammed is a different thing; a different quality it has. It has known a man, it has been with a man who was an inner sun, an inner light. This hair has taken a deep bath in something mysterious, which rarely happens.
To be established in this inner light is the only lamp worth taking to the altar of the deity. Nothing else will do. How to create this center of awareness? I will discuss one or two or three methods. Because I was talking of Buddha and buddhakaya, it will be good to start with Buddha. He invented a method, one of the most wonderful methods, most powerful methods, to create an inner fire, an inner sun of awareness. And not only to create it, but the method is such that simultaneously that inner light begins to penetrate to the very cells of the body, to your whole being.
Buddha used breathing as the method: breathing with awareness. The method is known as anapansati yoga, the yoga of incoming and outgoing breath awareness. You are breathing, but it is an unconscious thing. And breath is prana, breath is the Bergsonian élan vital, the vitality, the very vitality, the very life – and it is unconscious. You are not aware of it. If you need to be aware of it, you may drop dead any moment because then it will be very difficult to breathe.
I have heard about certain fish which cannot sleep for more than six minutes, because if they sleep more they die – they forget to breathe. If their sleep is deepened, they forget to breathe, so they die. Those particular fish cannot sleep for more than six minutes. They have to live in a group, always in a group. Some fish is sleeping, other fish have to be constantly alert not to allow that fish to go more into sleep. When the time is over, they will disturb the sleep; otherwise the fish will just go dead. She will not come back again.
This is a scientific observation. It will be a problem with you also if you have to remember it, if you have to do breathing. Then you will have to remember constantly to do it, and you cannot remember anything even for a single moment. One moment missed and you are no more! So breathing is unconscious; it doesn’t depend on you. Even if you are in a coma for months together, you will go on breathing.
Really, just by the way, I would like to tell you those fish are rare. And some day science may come to know that they have a certain deep awareness which even man lacks, because to breathe consciously is a very difficult thing. Those fish may have attained a certain awareness which is not with us.
Buddha used this breath as the vehicle to do two things simultaneously: one, to create consciousness; and the other, to allow that consciousness to penetrate to the very cells of the body. He said, “Breathe consciously.” It is not a pranayama; it is just making breath an object of awareness – with no change, no need to change your breath. Just as it is, natural, let it be as it is. Don’t change it. Do something else: when you breathe in, breathe consciously. Let your consciousness move with the breath going in. When the breath goes out, move out. Go in, come out…consciously, move with the breath. Let your attention be with the breath, flowing with it. Don’t forget even a single breath.
Buddha is reported to have said that if you can be aware of your breath even for a single hour, you are already enlightened. But not a single breath should be missed. One hour is enough. It looks so small, a fragment of time. It is not. When you try awareness, one hour will look like millennia, because you cannot be aware, ordinarily, for more than five or six seconds, and that too a very alert man. Otherwise, every second you will miss. You will start: breath is going in, and breath has gone in, and you have gone somewhere else. Suddenly you remember again: the breath is going out, the breath has gone out, you have moved somewhere else.
To move with the breath means no thought should be allowed, because thought will take your attention, thought will distract you. So Buddha never says to stop thinking. He says, “Just breathe consciously.” Automatically, thinking will stop. You cannot do both, think and breathe, consciously.
A thought comes to your mind, your attention is withdrawn. A single thought and you become unconscious of your breathing process. So Buddha used a very simple technique and very vital. He would say to his bhikkhus, “Do whatsoever you are doing, but don’t forget a simple thing: remember the incoming, outgoing breath. Move with it, flow with it.”
The more you try, the more you endeavor, the more you can be conscious. It will increase by seconds and seconds. It is arduous, a difficult thing, but once you can feel it you are a different man, a different being in a different world.
This works in a double way: when you consciously breathe in and out, you come to your center, by and by, because your breath touches the center of your being. Every moment…the breath goes in, it touches your center of being.
Physiologically, you think that breath is just for the purification of the blood, so it is just a function of your heart. It is – bodily it is a function of your heart, just a pumping system to refresh your blood circulation, to give to your blood more oxygen which is needed, and to throw out carbon dioxide which is excreta, used stuff, to throw it out, and renew it and replace it. But this is only physiologically.
If you begin to be aware of your breath, by and by you will go deep – deeper than your heart. And one day you begin to feel a center just near your navel. That center can only be felt if you move with the breath, continuously, because the nearer you reach to the center, the more you will lose consciousness. You can start when the breath is going in, just touching your nose, you can start being very alert. The further inward it moves, the more and more difficult consciousness will become. And a thought will come or some sound, or something will happen, and you will move.
If you can go to the very center, where for a subtle moment breath stops, there is a gap. The breath goes in, the breath goes out: between these two there is a subtle gap. That gap is your center. When you move with the breath, then only, after a very long effort, you will become aware of the gap – when there is no movement of the breath, breath is neither coming nor going. Between two breaths there is a subtle gap, an interval. In that interval you are at the center.
So breath is used by Buddha as a passage to come nearer and nearer and nearer to the center. When you move out, be conscious of the breath. Again there is a gap. There are two gaps: one gap inside, one gap outside. The breath goes in and goes out…there is a gap. The breath goes out and goes in…there is a gap. The second gap is even more difficult to be aware of.
Look at this process. Your center is between the incoming breath and outgoing breath. There is another center, the cosmic center; you may call it godliness. When the breath goes out and comes in, there is again a gap. In that gap is the cosmic center. These two centers are not two different things, but first you will become aware of your inner center and then you will become aware of an outer center. And then ultimately you will become aware that both these centers are one. Then out and in lose meaning.
Buddha says move with the breath consciously and you will create a center of awareness. And once the center is created, awareness begins to move with the breath into your blood, to the very cells, because every cell needs air and every cell needs oxygen and every cell, so to speak, breathes – every cell! And now the scientists say that it even seems that the earth breathes. And because of the Einsteinian concept of an expanding universe, now theoretical scientists say that it seems that the whole universe is breathing.
When you breathe in, your chest expands. When you breathe out, your chest shrinks. Now theoretical scientists say it seems that the whole universe breathes. When the whole universe is breathing in, it expands. When the whole universe breathes out, it shrinks. In the old Hindu puranas it is said that creation is Brahma’s one breath, the incoming breath; and destruction, pralaya, the end of the world, is the outgoing breath. One breath, one creation.
In a very miniature way, in a very atomic way, the same is happening in you. When your awareness becomes so one with breathing, your breathing takes your awareness to the very cells. Rays now penetrate and the whole body becomes a buddha body. Really, then you have no material body at all. You have a body of awareness.
This is what is meant by this sutra: …be established in the sun of awareness – this is the only lamp.
Just like Buddha’s method, it will be good to understand another method, one method more. Tantra has used sex. That is again another very vital force. If you want to go deep, you have to use very vital forces, the deepest in you. Tantra uses sex. When you are in a sex act, you are very near to the center of creation, to the very source of life. If you can go into a sex act consciously, it becomes meditation.
It is very difficult, more difficult than breath. You can breathe consciously in a small measure, of course, but you can. But the very phenomenon of sex requires your unconsciousness. If you become conscious, you will lose sexual desire and lust. If you become conscious, there will be no sex desire inside. So Tantra has done the most difficult thing in the world. In the history of experiments with consciousness, Tantra goes the deepest.
Of course, one can deceive oneself. And with Tantra deception is very easy, because no one other than you knows what the fact is, and no one else can know. But only one in a hundred can succeed in a tantric method of awareness, because sex means unconsciousness. So a tantrica, a tantric disciple, has to work, just like with breathing, he has to work with sex, sex desire. He has to be conscious of it; actually going into the sex act, he has to be conscious.
Your very body, the sex energy, comes to a peak to explode. The tantric sadhak comes to this peak consciously, and there is a method to judge. If sex release happens automatically and you are not the master, then you are not conscious of it. Then the unconscious has taken over. Sex comes to a peak, and then you cannot do anything but release. That release is not done by you. You can start a sexual process, but you never end it. The end is always taken over by the unconscious.
If you can retain the peak, and if it becomes your conscious act to release it or not to release it, if you can come back from the peak without release, or if you can maintain that peak for hours together – if it is your conscious act, then you are the master. And if someone can come to a sexual peak, just on the verge of orgasm, and can retain it and be conscious of it, suddenly he becomes aware of the deepest center inside, suddenly. And it is not only that he is aware of the deepest center inside of himself, he is also aware of the center of his partner, the deepest center.
That’s why a tantra practitioner, if he is a man, will always worship the partner. The partner is not just a sex object. She is divine, she is a goddess. And the act is not carnal at all. If you can go into it consciously, it is the deepest spiritual act possible. But the deepest is bound to be virtually impossible.
So either breath or sex.
Mahavira has used hunger. That again is a very deep thing. Hunger is not just hunger for your taste or for something else – it is for your very survival. Mahavira used hunger, fasting, as a method of awareness. It is not austerity. Mahavira was not an ascetic. People have misunderstood him completely. He was not an ascetic at all. No wise man ever is. But he was using fasting, hunger, as a vehicle to awareness.
You might have stumbled upon the fact that when your stomach is full, you begin to feel sleepy, you begin to feel unconscious. You want to go to sleep. When you are hungry, fasting, you cannot sleep. Even in the night you will turn this way and that; you cannot sleep. On a fast, why can’t you sleep? Because it is dangerous to life. Now, sleep is a secondary need. First need is food – get food! That’s the first need. Sleep is not a problem now.
But Mahavira used it in a very, very scientific way – because you cannot fall asleep when you are fasting, you can remember things more easily, consciousness comes to you more easily. And Mahavira used this very hunger as an object of consciousness. He would stand continuously. You might have seen Buddha’s statue sitting; Mahavira’s statues are, more or less, all standing. He was always standing. You can feel your hunger more when you are standing. If you are sitting you will feel it less; if you lie down you will feel it even less.
When you are standing, the whole body begins to be hungry. You feel the hunger all over the body. The whole body flows, it becomes one river of hunger. From head to foot you are hungry. It is not only the belly that feels it; the whole body feels hunger. And Mahavira would stand silently watching, moving with hunger – just like moving with breath, moving with hunger. It is reported that in his twelve-year period of silence, he fasted, now and then, more or less, for eleven years. Only for three hundred and sixty days in twelve years did he take food. Hunger was the method.
Now, food and sex are the deepest things, just like breath is. When you go on, go on, go on being conscious of your hunger, doing nothing, just being conscious, suddenly you are thrown to your center, to your being. Because first hunger moves from the surface. If you don’t feed the surface, then deeper layers become hungry. If you don’t feed the deeper layers, then still deeper layers become hungry. And it goes on and on and on. Ultimately, the whole body begins to be hungry. When the whole body is hungry, you are thrown to the center.
So when you feel hunger, that is a false hunger. Really, that is more or less a habit, not hunger. If you take your lunch at a particular time, at one o’clock, then at one o’clock you begin to feel hunger. This is a false hunger, not connected with the body at all. If you don’t take food at one o’clock, at two o’clock you will feel that the hunger has disappeared. If it was natural, it would have grown more. Why should it disappear? If it was real, then you would feel it more at two and more at three and more at four. But it has disappeared. It was just a habit, a very superficial thing.
If you fast for three weeks, then only a well-fed man can come to a real hunger. Then for the first time you will know what real hunger is. Just now, you can never feel that hunger is as forceful as sex. It is more forceful – but real hunger. So it happens if you are on a fast that your sex desire will die, because now a more foundational thing is at stake.
Food is for your survival, sex is for the survival of your race. It is a distant phenomenon, not related with you. Sex is food for the race, not for you. You will die, but through sex humanity can live. So it is not really your problem; it is a racial problem. You can even give it up, but you cannot give up food, because that is your problem, it is concerned with you. So if you go on a fast, by and by sex will disappear; it will become more and more distant.
Because of this, many people are just befooling themselves. They think that if they take less food, they have become celibate, brahmacharins. They have not. The problem has only been shifted. Give them proper food and the sex desire will come back – more forcibly, more fresh, more young.
If you fast even further than three weeks, then your whole body hungers. Each cell, every cell of your body, begins to feel the hunger. Then for the first time not only is your stomach hungry, your whole body is hungry. You are surrounded by a deep fire of hunger. Mahavira used this as a method to be aware; so he would be hungry, fasting, and be aware.
A man can live without food for three months, a healthy man, of course. A normally healthy man can live for three months without food – for three months! If you go on fasting for three months, then suddenly one day you will be just on the verge of death. This is a conscious encounter with death. And that encounter comes only when you are on the verge of leaving your body and jumping to your center inside. Now the whole body is exhausted. It cannot continue. You are thrown back to your source. You cannot live in the body. By and by, you have been thrown by the body inside, inside, inside.
Food takes you outside, fasting takes you inside. A moment comes when the body cannot carry you any further – you are thrown to your center. In that moment the inner sun is released.
So Mahavira would fast for three months, even for four months. He was extraordinarily healthy. And then, suddenly, he would go into the village to beg for food. It has been so far a secret why suddenly, after three or four months, he would go into the village to beg for food. Really, whenever he came to the verge where even a single moment could prove fatal, only then would he go to beg for food. He would again enter the body, and then again he would fast, again go to the center, enter the body, go to the center….
Now you can feel the process: just breath coming in, going out; life coming into the body, life going out of the body, life coming into the body, life going out of the body. And Mahavira would be aware of this process. He would take food, he would be back in the body, so to speak, and then he would fast again. This he was doing continuously for twelve years. This was an inner process.
So I discussed three things: breath, sex, hunger – very primary, very basic, foundational things. Be conscious of any one of them. Breath is the easiest. It will be difficult to use a tantra method. The mind would like to use it, but it will be difficult. It will be difficult to use the hunger method, the mind will not like it. These two are very difficult. Whether you like them or not, they are difficult. Only the breath process is simple.
And for the coming age, I think Buddha’s method will be very helpful. It is moderate, easy, not very dangerous. That’s why Buddha is known always as the originator of the middle path, majjhimnikaya, the golden mean. Sex and food, between these two, breath is the golden mean, the exact middle – the exact middle.
And with any method – there are many more – any method, you are established into the inner light. And once established, your light begins to flow to your body cells. Then your whole mechanism is refreshed: you have a buddha body, an enlightened body.

============================================================

Osho,
Man's partial consciousness is a stage in the grand evolution of life. What could be the significance of his volitional efforts in its growth?
Please also explain the role that the buddhas, the enlightened ones, play in the expansion of human consciousness.
Evolution is unconscious. No volition is needed, no conscious effort. It is just natural. But once consciousness evolves, then it is a totally different matter. Once the consciousness is there, evolution stops. Evolution is only up to consciousness; the work of evolution is to create consciousness. Once consciousness is there, evolution stops. Then the whole responsibility falls upon consciousness itself. So this has to be understood in many ways.
Man is not evolving now. Since long, man has not been evolving. Evolution has stopped as far as man is concerned. The body has come to its peak; now the human body has not evolved since long. The most ancient bones and the most ancient human bodies that have been found are not basically different from our bodies; there is no basic difference. A human body which is one hundred thousand years old, if it can be revived and trained, it will be just like you. There will be no difference at all.
The human body has stopped evolving. When did it stop? When consciousness comes in, evolution’s work is over. Now it is up to you to evolve. So man is static, not evolving, unless man himself endeavors. Now, beyond man, everything will be conscious. Below man everything is unconscious. With man a new factor has entered – the factor of awareness, the factor of consciousness. With this factor, evolution’s work is over. Evolution is to create a situation in which consciousness evolves. Once consciousness enters in, now the whole responsibility is on consciousness. So man will not evolve now; naturally, there will be no evolution.
Consciousness is the peak of evolution, the last step, but it is not the last step of life. Consciousness is the last step of evolution, of all animal heritage. It is the last step, the climax, the peak. But for further growth, it is to be the first step. And when I say evolution has stopped, I mean that now an inner effort is needed: unless you do something, you will not evolve. Nature has brought you to a point which is the last for unconscious growth. Now you are aware, now you know. When you know, you are responsible.
A child is not responsible for his acts, but an adult is. A madman is not responsible for his acts, but a sane man is. If you are under an alcoholic intoxicant, if you are not behaving consciously, you are not responsible. With consciousness, with the faculty of knowing there, you become responsible for yourself.
Sartre has said somewhere that responsibility is the only human burden. No animal is responsible. Evolution is responsible for all that an animal is. The animal is not responsible for anything. Man is responsible. So whatsoever you do now will be your responsibility. If you create a hell and go down, it is up to you. If you evolve, grow and create a blissful state of being, it is up to you.
Existentialists make a very fine distinction, and a beautiful one, and meaningful also. They say for animals essence is first and existence is a later growth. This is difficult to understand, but try. They say for animals, for trees, essence is first and existence follows. There is a seed: the seed is, in essence, the tree. The essence is there, the existence will just follow. The essential thing is there; it just has to be manifested, expressed. The tree will follow. The tree is not going to be a new thing; in a way it was already there. So, really, the seed has no freedom – the tree exists in it. And the tree is also without freedom – it is destined by the seed. This is what is meant: essence is first, below man, and then existence follows.
With man, the whole thing is just the opposite: existence comes first and then essence follows. You are born with no fixed future, you will have to create it. You are born, so you have an existence, simple existence, with no essence. Now you will create the essence. So man creates himself. A tree is created by nature, man creates himself.
Man is simply born as an existence, with no essence. Then whatsoever you do will make your essence; your acts will create you. And the freedom is multidimensional. A man can become anything, or he may not become anything. He may remain just an existence without any essence; he may just remain simply a body without any soul. The soul is, in a way, to be created.
Gurdjieff used to say that you have no souls, you are without souls. Unless you create it, how can you have it? It looks contradictory to all the teachings of religions – it is not. When religions say that everyone has a soul, it only means that everyone can have a soul. That’s a possibility. You can grow to be a soul. If you already have a soul, then there is no distinction between a seed and you. And if you are growing like a seed into a tree, if you are growing just like a seed into a man, then there is no difference between man and all that exists below man.
Man is a freedom – freedom to be. He can be many things, he can be anything. And it may be that he remains just a possibility without being anything. That creates a dizziness and that creates fear.
Kierkegaard has given a concept of dread. He says that man lives in dread. What is that dread, the fear? This is the fear: you are simply a possibility, nothing else. You have only existence, no essence. You can create it, you may miss it. The responsibility is yours.
This is a very dreadful state. Nothing is certain, man is insecure. Every moment many directions open, and you have to move in some way, somewhere, without knowing where you are moving, without knowing what the result will be, without knowing what you will be tomorrow.
Your tomorrow will not come automatically out from your today. The tomorrow of a seed will come automatically from its today. The death of an animal will be the automatic result of his life – not so with you. That’s the difference. Your death will be your achievement: you will be responsible for it. And that’s why every man dies in a specific way. No man’s death is similar to anyone else’s. It cannot be.
Dog A, Dog B, Dog C, they all die in one way. Their death is just part of their life. They are not responsible for their life, they are not responsible for their death. So when someone says that he will die a dog’s death, it means that he will die without being evolved, without being an essence. He will die just a possibility. Two dogs die similarly – never two men. They cannot die similarly. And if they do die similarly, that means they have missed the opportunity to evolve.
With consciousness entering, you are responsible for everything, no matter what. This is a great burden and a deep anguish and it creates fear. You are just over an abyss. This is what I mean when I say: man now needs a conscious effort. To be man means entering a field of conscious evolution. Millions and millions of years have created you, but now nature will not help. This is the peak for natural growth. Now nature cannot do anything for you. It has done already all it can.
Because of this, there is bound to be a deep inner tension. Every moment man is in a tension. It is natural, and it is good. Don’t try to forget it. Use it. You can try to forget it, then you miss the opportunity. So any effort to forget your tense state of mind is erroneous, dangerous. You are falling back. Use this inner tension to grow, to move further. Now you cannot move further in the body. The body has come to a dead end, a cul-de-sac. There is no further movement.
The body moves in a horizontal way. It is just like this: an airplane is running on the earth, on the ground, on its track, to take off. There is a moment when the horizontal running will stop. It will have to run for a mile or two or three miles, just to gather momentum. Then a moment comes when no horizontal running is of any use. And if an airplane goes on running on the ground, it is not an airplane; it is behaving like a car. When the momentum comes, the airplane leaves the ground and a vertical, upward movement takes place.
This is what has happened with man. Evolution has been running, up to man, on the ground, so to speak, horizontally. Now man is the momentum. Now with man, an upward, vertical movement is the only movement. If you miss this point and if you think that “Because for so many million years we were just running on the ground, so we are to continue running on the ground,” you miss the whole thing. Because this whole running was just for this moment, so that you can take off.
Animals are running toward man, trees are running toward animals, matter is running toward trees – everything on this earth is running toward man. For what can man run? Man is the central focus. Everything is growing toward man. Horizontally, for man there is no movement. And if you continue horizontally, then your life will not be really a human life. Your life will consist of many layers which are not human.
Sometimes you may behave like an animal, if you go on horizontally, and sometimes you may just vegetate, and sometimes you may just be dead matter, but never a man. So look deep down inside your life. It has not taken the vertical thrust. Then what are you doing? Think about every act, and then you can know that this act belongs to the animal world, that act belongs to the vegetable kingdom…. Consider your activity, your life, and then you will know. Something is just like dead matter, something is just like a vegetable growing, something is just like animals. Where is the man?
With the upward thrust, man comes into existence – and that is up to you. Conscious evolution is now going to be the only evolution. That’s why religion will become more and more significant every day. Every day, every moment, religion will become more and more significant, because now scientists feel that there seems to be no movement.
Of course, horizontally there is no movement. You cannot progress any further; everything has stopped. So science goes on just adding to your senses. Your eyes have stopped, so now you can use instruments to see. Your brain has stopped, so now you can use computers. Your legs have stopped, so now you can use cars. Whatsoever science is giving is just additional instruments for a growth that has stopped. Man is not growing, only new instruments are growing.
Every instrument, of course, increases your power, but you don’t grow through it. Rather, on the contrary, cars have added much in speed, but they have destroyed your legs. This is unfortunate, but this is going to happen. If computers replace man’s mind – and they will replace it because man’s mind is not so efficient as a computer can be – if computers replace man’s mind they will do much, but ultimately they will destroy your mind, because whatsoever is not used is destroyed.
So science feels now that whatsoever is being done is just giving a false notion of evolution. If we go back to the past, the highest speed was horse-speed, twenty-five miles per hour. Now we have come to two thousand miles per hour speed. Speed has evolved from twenty-five miles per hour to two thousand miles per hour. Not man, but speed has evolved. Not man – man remains the same. Rather, on the contrary, he has regressed, because a man riding a horse is a stronger man than a man flying in an aircraft. Speed has progressed, evolved, and man has regressed.
A certain group of scientists thinks that man is regressing, not evolving. It may be so, because in life you can never be static. If you are not evolving, you will regress. There is no static moment in life; you cannot remain at one point. You cannot say, “If I am not growing, then I will remain whatsoever I am. I will maintain the status quo.” You cannot maintain it. Either you go further or you fall back down.
A certain group of scientists thinks that man is, day by day, regressing, that there is an infantilization. Man is behaving more like children than like adult men everywhere on the earth. If we look, many things become clear and obvious. One thing: it was always the old man, the evolved man, who was predominant in society, but our society is the only society in the world where children have become predominant. They dominate everything – every trend, every fashion, everything! They are the models. Whatsoever they do becomes religion, whatsoever they do becomes politics, whatsoever they do sets a trend all over the world.
If we go back, a thirty-year-old person was behaving in a mature way. Now that’s not the case. Even a thirty-year-old person is behaving in infantile ways, juvenile – the same tantrums, the same childish attitudes. What is a childish attitude? A child thinks that he is the center of the world and his every wish is to be fulfilled immediately. It is fulfilled! When he is hungry milk is given, when he weeps everyone pays attention. The whole family is centered around him.
Children become dictators. They know how to dictate to the whole family. A very small child dictates to the whole family. The father persuades him, the mother bribes him. Even if guests come in the home, he dictates everything. A child thinks he is the center of the world: he is to be supported, helped, by everyone, without any cost. He is not to give love, he is only to demand. Of course, we cannot expect from a child that he should love. He demands, and demands everything. And if a demand is not fulfilled he gets violent, angry. Then he is against the whole world; he will smash things.
Now this has happened with everyone. This is always so with children, but this is now with everyone. Our so-called revolutions are nothing but childish efforts. Our so-called rebellions are nothing but everyone thinking himself to be at the center and his every desire should be fulfilled immediately. And if you are not going to fulfill them, he is going to destroy the whole world.
Student revolts in the universities all over the world, they just show immature, juvenile minds. What does it mean, students throwing stones at the university windows, setting fire to the buildings, destroying? What does it mean? They have no sense of maturity at all. And if you begin to think about it, then not only students, children, boys and girls: if you look at our modern man, even a father, a mother, they are just behaving childishly. If you look at our politicians, they are just behaving childishly, with no maturity at all.
What has happened? Really, man’s growth has stopped; evolutionary growth has stopped. And now we have taken just a substitute for this growth: scientific accumulation. Man has stopped, things grow. Your house goes on becoming bigger and bigger, and you remain the same. Your wealth grows, and because of this growth you feel that you are growing. Your knowledge grows, your information grows, and because of that you think you are growing.
Of course, obviously, a Buddha knows less than you, but that doesn’t mean that you are more grown-up. A Jesus knows less than you, he knows less than any Catholic priest, because he was never trained, never educated: just a carpenter’s son, uneducated, with no information of the world. But, still, you are not more evolved than him. A Mohammed is just illiterate, a Kabir just a nobody, but they are more evolved. But then that evolution is something else: evolution of consciousness, not of things.
You can substitute having for being. Being is a different dimension of growth, vertical; having is horizontal. Things go on and on, and you have so many things, so much information, so much knowledge, so much wealth, so many degrees, so many honors…everything. But this is accumulation, horizontal. There is no upward thrust. You remain the same. But you cannot really remain the same, because if you are not growing you begin to behave childishly, you regress. This is one of the greatest problems humanity is encountering today.
Science can give you only things. It can give you moons and planets, and it can give you the whole universe. Religion can give you only one thing: an upward movement, a vertical growth, a conscious methodology to grow into being. It is not important what you have; it is totally irrelevant for your growth. The only significant thing is what you are. And this growth for being is a responsibility because it is a freedom. You are not forced by evolutionary forces to grow now – you are at liberty.
Evolution is not goading you. It is goading animals, it is goading trees, it is goading everything except man. Evolution is pushing hard so that you may grow, but with man the thing is finished. Now you have become conscious, so do whatsoever – whatsoever you want to do.
Sartre says man is condemned to be free – condemned to be free! The whole of nature is at ease because there is no freedom. Freedom is a great burden. That’s why we don’t even like freedom. Howsoever we may talk about it, no one likes freedom. Everyone fears freedom. Freedom is a dangerous thing. In nature there is no freedom; that’s why there is so much silence. You can never say to a dog, “You are an imperfect dog.” Every dog is perfect. You can say to a man, “You are not a perfect man.” It is meaningful. But to say to a dog, “You are not a perfect dog,” is absurd. Every dog is perfect – because a dog is not free to be. He is goaded by evolution. He is made, he is not a self-creator.
A rose is a rose. Howsoever beautiful, it is not free, it is just a slave. Look at a rose: beautiful, but just a slave, goaded. There is no freedom to flower or not to flower. There is no problem, there is no choice: a flower is to flower. The flower cannot say, “I don’t like flowering,” or, “I refuse.” It has no say, no freedom. That’s why nature is so silent, a slave. It cannot err, it cannot go wrong. And if you cannot go wrong, if you are always right, and if your “right” is not in your hands, then it is just goaded by eternal forces.
Nature is a deep slavery. With man, for the first time, freedom enters. Man is free to be or not to be. Then there is anguish, fear, whether “I may be capable…” whether “I may be or may not be. What is going to happen?” There is a deep trembling. Every moment is a suspended moment. Nothing is fixed and certain, nothing is predictable with man. Everything is unpredictable.
We talk about freedom, but no one likes freedom. So we go on talking about freedom, and creating slavery. We talk about freedom and then create a new slavery. Our every freedom is just a change of slavery. We go on changing from one slavery to another, from one bondage to another. No one likes freedom because freedom creates fear. Then you have to decide and choose. We ask, we want that someone should tell us what to do – the society, the guru, the scripture, the tradition, the parents. Someone should say what to do, someone should show the path, then we can follow. But we cannot move by ourselves. There is freedom and there is fear.
That’s why there are so many religions. So many religions – they are not because of Jesus and Buddha and Krishna, they are because of a deep-rooted fear of freedom. You cannot be just a man. You have to be a Hindu or a Mohammedan or a Christian. Just by being a Christian you lose your freedom, by being a Hindu you are no longer a man, because now you say, “I will follow a tradition. I will not move in the uncharted, in the unknown. I will move on a well-trodden path. I will move behind someone. I will not move alone.”
“I am a Hindu” means “I will move in a crowd, I will not move as an individual, because if I move as an individual, alone, there is freedom. Every moment I have to decide, every moment I have to give birth to myself, every moment I am creating my soul. And no one else will be responsible. Only I will be responsible, ultimately.”
Nietzsche has said, “Now God is dead and man is totally free.” If God is really dead, then man is totally free. And man is not so afraid of God’s death; he is much more afraid of his freedom. If there is a God, then everything is okay with you. If there is no God, then you are left totally free – condemned to be free. Now do whatsoever you like and suffer the consequences, and no one else will be responsible.
Erich Fromm has written a book, The Fear of Freedom. You fall in love and you begin to think of marriage. Love is a freedom, marriage is slavery. But it is difficult to find a person who falls in love and will not think of marriage, immediately. Because love is a freedom, there is fear. Marriage is a fixed thing; there is no fear. Marriage is an institution, dead. Love is an event, alive. It moves, it may change. Marriage never moves, it never changes.
Because of this, marriage has a certainty, a security. Love has no certainty, no security. Love is insecure. Any moment it may disappear into the blue, as it has appeared from the blue. Any moment it may disappear. It is very unearthly; there are no roots in the earth. It is unpredictable. So, “Better get into marriage. Then roots are there. Now this marriage cannot evaporate into the blue. It is an institution.”
Everywhere – just as in love – everywhere, when we find freedom, we transform it into a slavery. The sooner the better. Then we are at ease. So our every story ends with marriage: “They were married, and after that they were always happy.” No one is happy, but it is good to end the story there because then begins the hell. So every story ends with the most beautiful moment. And what is that moment? Freedom turning into slavery.
And this is not only so with love but with everything. So marriage is an ugly thing; it is bound to be. Every institution is going to be ugly, because it is just a dead corpse of something which was alive. But with anything alive, uncertainty is bound to be there. Alive means it can move, it can change, it can be different. I love you; the next moment I may not love you. But if I am your husband or I am your wife you can be certain: the next moment also I will be your husband, your wife. It is an institution. Dead things are very permanent. Alive things are momentary, changing, in a flux.
Man is afraid of freedom, and freedom is the only thing which makes you man. So we are suicidal, destroying our freedom, and with that destruction destroying our whole possibility of being. And then having is good, because having means accumulating dead things. You can go on accumulating; there is no end to it. And the more you accumulate, the more secured you are.
When I say now man has to move consciously, I mean this: that you have to be aware of your freedom and also aware of your fear of freedom.
How to use this freedom? Religion is nothing but an effort toward conscious evolution, an effort to use this freedom. Your volitional efforts are significant. Whatsoever you are doing nonvolitionally is just part of the past. Your future depends on your volitional acts. A very simple act done with awareness, volitionally, gives you a certain growth, even an ordinary act.
If you go on a fast, not because you have no food – you have food, you can eat it; you have hunger, you can eat – you go on a fast because it is a volitional act, a conscious act. No animal can perform this. An animal will go on a fast, sometimes, when there is no hunger. An animal will have to fast when there is no food. But only man can fast when there is hunger and food both. This is a volitional act. You use your freedom. The hunger cannot goad you. The hunger cannot push you and the food cannot pull you.
If there is no food, it is not a fast. If there is no hunger, it is naturopathy; it is not a fast. Hunger is there, food is there, and you are on a fast. This fasting is a volitional act, a conscious act. This will give you much awareness. You will feel a subtle freedom: freedom from food, freedom from hunger – really, deep down, freedom from the body, and still more deep down, freedom from nature. And as your freedom grows, your consciousness grows. As your consciousness grows, your freedom grows. They are interrelated. Be more free and you will be more conscious; be more conscious and you will be more free. They are interdependent.
But we can deceive ourselves. A son, a daughter, can say, “I will rebel against my father so that I may be more free.” Hippies are doing that. But rebellion is not freedom, because it is just natural at a particular age to rebel against parents. It is not freedom, it is just natural. A child who is just coming out of the womb of his mother cannot say, “I am leaving the womb.” It is natural.
When someone is sexually mature, it is a second birth. Now he must fight his parents, because only if he fights with his parents will he move further away from them. And unless he moves further away from them, he cannot create a new family nucleus. So every child will go against his parents. This is natural. And if a child is not going against his parents, it is a growth, because then he is fighting nature.
For example, you get married. Your mother and your wife are going to be in a conflict, which is natural – which is natural, I say, because for the mother it is a great shock. You have moved to another woman. Up to now you were wholly and solely your mother’s. And it makes no difference, because deep down no one is a mother and no one is a wife. Deep down every female is a woman. Suddenly you have moved to another woman, the woman in your mother will suffer, will become jealous. Fight and conflict is natural. But if a mother can still love you, it is a growth. And if your mother can love you more than she ever loved you now that you have moved to a new woman, it is growth, it is conscious growth. She is going above natural instincts.
When you are a child, you love your parents. That is natural – just a bargain. You are helpless and they are doing everything for you. You love them and you give them respect. When your parents have become old and they cannot do anything for you, if you still respect and love them, that is a growth. Anywhere that natural instinct is transcended, you grow. You have taken a volitional decision. Your being will grow and you will attain essence.
The old Indian culture tried in every way to make life such that everything becomes a growth. It is natural for a small child to respect his father. It is unnatural when your father has become just old, dying. He cannot do anything for you, is just a burden to you, then to respect him is unnatural. No animal can do that; the natural bond has broken. Only man can do that. And if it is done, you grow. It is volitional.
Any volitional act, simple or complex… I will tell you a story:

In the Mahabharata, Bhishma’s father fell in love with a girl. He was very old, but even when you are old to fall in love is natural. Even on the deathbed you can fall in love. The girl was ready, but the girl’s father made a condition. He said, “You have your son, Bhishma” – Bhishma was young, just to be married – “and Bhishma will inherit your kingdom, so make it the condition to me that if any son is born from my daughter to you, he will inherit the kingdom, not Bhishma.”
It was so unnatural for the father to tell Bhishma this, because he was an old man, he can die any day. But he was worried, he became sad, so Bhishma asked him, “What is the matter? Something is on your mind. What can I do, tell me?”
So he fabricated a story. Old men are very efficient. He said, “Because you are the only son, only one to me, and no one can trust nature, if you die or something happens, then who will inherit my kingdom? So I have talked with wise men and they say, ‘It is better you marry again so that you can get another son.”
So Bhishma said, “What is wrong in it? Marry.”
Then the father said, “But there is a difficulty. I want to marry this girl, but this is the condition of her father that ‘Your son Bhishma should not inherit the kingdom – my daughter’s son should.’”
So Bhishma said, “It is okay with me. I give you my promise.”
Bhishma went to the man whose daughter was going to be married to his father. He said, “I promise you, I will not inherit the kingdom.”
But that man was just a fisherman, very ordinary. He said. “I know, but how can you promise me? Your sons may create trouble. And we are just fishermen, very ordinary people. If your sons create trouble, we will not be able to do anything.”
So Bhishma said, “I promise you I will never marry. Okay? Then the whole thing is finished.”
This was very unnatural. A young man, and he never married. He never looked at a woman with any carnal desire. This became a growth. This created a subtle being, an integration, a crystallization. Then there was no need for any other sadhana. Only this fact was enough. He was crystallized. This promise was enough. He became a different man. He began to grow vertically. The natural, horizontal line stopped. With this promise, everything stopped. There was no biological possibility now. Everything natural became meaningless.
And Bhishma is rare: with no spiritual practice, with no spiritual effort, other than this, he attained the highest peak possible.

So any act, simple or complex, which you decide on your part – without any instinctive goading behind, without any natural force forcing you to decide – if it is your decision, through that decision you are created. Every decision is decisive for your birth. You grow in a different dimension.
So use every act, very ordinary acts. You are sitting. Decide that “Now I will not move my body for ten minutes.” You will be surprised that the body was not moving before, but now the body forces you to move. You begin to feel many subtle movements in the body you were not even aware of. Now the body will revolt – millennia of past habit. The body will say, “I will move.” The body will begin to tremble and there will be subtle movements, and you will feel many temptations to move. The legs will go to sleep, they will go dead, and you will feel somewhere to scratch, and many things. And you were sitting without any movement previously, but now you cannot sit. But if you can sit, even for ten minutes without moving, you will not need any other meditation.
In Japan they call “just sitting” the only meditation. Their word for it is zazen. Zazen means just sitting. But then sit. Then don’t do anything else. A seeker will come to a Zen master and he will say, “Just sit. Sit for hours together.” In a Zen monastery you will see many many seekers sitting for hours together, just sitting, not doing anything. No meditation is given, no contemplation, no prayer. Just sitting is the meditation.
A seeker will sit for six hours without any movement, and when every movement falls down, withers away, and there is no movement – not only no movement, but no desire to move inside – you are centered, you are crystallized. You have used a very ordinary act, of sitting, for your volition, for your will, for your awareness.
It is very difficult if I say to you, “Just close your eyes and don’t open them.” Many temptations will be there. And then you will find it is very uneasy not to open them, and you will open them. And you can deceive even yourself that “I am not opening them. Suddenly they opened themselves, eyes opened themselves. I was not aware.” Or you can just deceive: you can have a small glimpse, a little glimpse, and then close your eyes.
But even if you can keep your eyes shut as a volitional act, that will help. Anything can become a medium to grow. So contemplate your habits, and whatsoever you do, do volitionally. Anything, any habit can be used, any mechanical action can be used. Do otherwise. Change it. And then once you decide, do it, otherwise it may prove fatal. It does.
If you decide something and then don’t do it, it is better not to decide, because that will give your will a very deep shock. And we are all doing that. We go on deciding and not doing. Ultimately, we lose every possibility of a will, and we begin to feel a deep will-lessness, a deep impotency, a deep weakness. And you decide about very ordinary things.
Someone decides, “Now I am not going to smoke,” and the next day he is smoking. You may think, “What is wrong in it? It was my decision and I am the master of my decision, so I have changed it.” You are not. You have changed because you are not the master. Smoking proves to be the master, not you. Smoking is more powerful than you. Then it is better not to decide – go on smoking. But if you decide, then let this decision be final. Then never move from it. That will give you growth.
Of course, every habit will fight with you. And your mind will say, “What are you doing? What is wrong with it?” Your mind will rationalize in many, many ways. I don’t say smoking is wrong. I say: deciding not to smoke and then smoking is wrong. Even vice versa: if you decide to smoke, then smoke. Then don’t stop. Then whatsoever happens, cancer happens, let it happen. Then if the whole world goes against it, let the whole world go against it. If you have decided to smoke, then smoke! Even at the cost of life, go on smoking. That will give you growth.
So it is not a question of cigarette or no cigarette, smoking or no smoking. Deep down it is a question of following a decision, a will, a voluntary act. Whatsoever the object is, it is irrelevant, but decide. And with small decisions you can create a great will, with very small decisions.
Just “I will not look out of the window for one hour.” A very, very small decision, with no meaning, meaningless. Who bothers whether you look out of the window or not? And nothing is happening out of the window. But the moment you decide not to look out of the window, your whole being will revolt and would like to see, and the window will become the focus of the whole world, as if you are missing everything – something is going to happen there.

One day Mulla Nasruddin decided not to go to the market. Just in the morning, early morning, at five o’clock. There was no question of the market, but he decided not to go to the market. Then he began to think about the market. And he had decided not to go because in the village there was market day once a week: “And every market day I go to the market uselessly – nothing to sell and nothing to buy.”
He was a poor man: “Nothing to sell and nothing to buy – why do I go to the market unnecessarily? Because everyone goes, it is marketday, a festivity in the village? Why should I go? So today I am not going. It is marketday.” He decided early, at five o’clock.
Then he began to think about it: “If something happens there? In case something happens there…”
So he worked it out, and he fidgeted inside. And then, by six o’clock, he was at the market. It was four or five hours still till the market would open and people would gather. He was at the market sitting under a tree, just in the center of the market.
Someone asked Mulla Nasruddin, “Why are you sitting here so early?”
Nasruddin said, “It is market day, and I thought if something happens and a large crowd is there I may not get to the right point. So I am just sitting here in the center. If something happens, I will be the first. And who knows? In this world everything is possible.”
The marketplace became very significant, the center of the world. And it became tempting just from the decision that “I am not going to the market, because every week I go uselessly. I have nothing to sell and nothing to purchase.”

The moment you decide, you will be tempted, and to transcend temptation is growth. To transcend temptation is growth. It is not suppression, remember. It is not suppression, it is transcendence. The temptation is there. You don’t fight it, you acknowledge it: “Okay, you are there, but I have decided.” Try it for your meditation.
You are sitting, and when you sit for meditation many thoughts will come, uninvited guests. They never come ordinarily. When you meditate, only then do they become interested in you. They will come, they will crowd, they will encircle you. Don’t fight with them. Just say, “I have decided not to be disturbed by you,” and remain still.
A thought comes to you. Just say to the thought, “Go away!” Don’t fight. By fighting you engage, by fighting you will prove weaker. Just say, “Go away” and remain still. And you will be surprised: just by saying to a thought, “Go away,” it goes away.
But say it with a will. Your mind must not be divided. It must not be something like a feminine no. It must not be like that because a feminine no, the more forcefully it is said, the more forcefully it means yes. It must not be a feminine no. If you say, “Go away,” then don’t mean inside, “Come nearer.” Then let it be, “Go away!” Mean it, and the thought will disappear. If you are angry and you have decided not to be angry, don’t suppress it. Just say to the anger, “I am not going to be angry,” and the anger will disappear.
There is a mechanism. Your will is needed because anger needs energy. If you say no with full energy, there is no energy left for the anger. A thought moves because deep down a hidden yes is there. That’s why a thought moves in your mind. If you say no, that yes is cut from the root, the very root. The thought becomes uprooted. It cannot be in you. But then the no or yes must mean what you say. Then no must mean no and yes must mean yes. But we go on saying yes meaning no, saying no meaning yes. Then the whole life becomes confused. And your mind, your body, they don’t know what you mean, what you say.
This conscious effort to decide, to act, to be, is now going to be the evolution for man. A buddha is different from you because of this effort and nothing else. Potentially there is no difference; only this conscious effort makes the difference. Between man and man, the real difference is only of conscious effort. All else is just superficial. Just your clothes are different, so to speak. But when you have something conscious in you, a growth, an inward growth, which is not natural but goes beyond, then you have a distinct individuality.

Buddha passes through a village, and many people have come to insult him. He says, “You have come late. You should have come ten years ago, because now I have become conscious. Now I cannot react. You abuse me, you insult me – it is okay with me. I am not going to react. You cannot force me to react.”
When someone abuses you he is forcing you to be angry, and when you become angry you are just a slave to him. He has made you angry. And we go on saying, without understanding what we are saying we go on saying, “That man made me angry.” What do you mean? “He said something and he made me angry.” So he is your master. He can say something, he can manipulate, he can push a button, and you are angry and you get mad. So your button can be pushed by anyone and you can be made mad.
Buddha says, “You have come late, friends. Now I have become master of my own self. You cannot force me to do something. If I want, I do. If I don’t want, I don’t do. You will have to go back. I am not going to reply to you.”
They are puzzled because this man is behaving very unpredictably. When you abuse someone, he is insulted, he feels angry. He must react in some way or other, but this man simply refuses to react.
And Buddha asks them, “I am in a hurry to reach the other village. If you are finished, then allow me to move. If you have something more to say, when I come back, be ready and tell me.”

This is transcendence. Something natural has been transcended. Reaction is natural, action is growth. We all react. We have no actions, only reactions. Someone appreciates you and you feel good, someone abuses you and you feel bad, someone will do this and this will happen. You are predictable.
A husband returning to his house knows what his wife is going to ask. Not only that: he prepares the answer. He has not reached yet, but he prepares the answer. And he knows that his wife is not going to believe it. The wife knows what she is going to ask and what her husband is going to answer…everything predictable. And every day this will happen, and this will continue for the whole life. The same questions, the same answers, the same suspicions, the same doubts, the same tricks, the same games – and people go on playing. These are just reactions.

Someone asked Mulla Nasruddin for some money. He said, “This is the first time you have asked, so I will give it to you.”
He gave the money. It was a small sum. Then Mulla Nasruddin thought, “This money is not going to come back.” But the man returned it; after seven days the man returned it. Mulla was surprised.
Then later on, after a week, the man again came to ask for some money. Mulla said, “Now you cannot deceive me again. You deceived me last time!”
The man said, “What are you saying? I returned your money.”
Mulla said, “But you deceived me, because I was thinking that you were not going to give it back. It was decidedly so. Then you deceived me by giving it back. Now you cannot deceive me again! I am not going to give you the money.”

If someone behaves unpredictably, it surprises us. We are so predictable. Everyone knows what one is going to do. You do this, and this will follow. It is a mechanical response.
Go beyond mechanical responses. Transcend natural forces. Create a will. That is the path beyond human evolution. Below human there is a natural growth, but that is not for man now.
And the second part of the question is: “Explain the role that the buddhas, the enlightened ones, play in the expansion of human consciousness.”
Buddhas play a role because human consciousness is not only individual, it is also collective. It is in you, but it is also outside of you. In a way, consciousness is in you and you are in a greater consciousness, just like a fish in the sea. The fish is in the sea and the sea is also in the fish.
We exist in a great ocean of consciousness. And whenever a buddha is born, whenever someone attains buddhahood, becomes enlightened through his efforts, through his conscious evolution, a wave in the ocean rises. With that wave everything in the ocean is affected. It is bound to be so because a wave in the ocean is part of a great pattern.
When a buddha rises to a height, the whole ocean is affected in multi, multi ways, because now this height will be echoed all over. You throw a stone into a lake: a small circle is created. Then it goes on expanding, and the whole lake will be affected ultimately. A buddha is a stone in the lake of human consciousness. Now humanity can never be the same again as it was before a buddha.
Christians have made it a very significant point. They divide history into “before Christ” and “after Christ.” This is very significant. Really, history is different: before Christ and after Christ there is a gap. Because a Christ is born, humanity can never go back again to the same primitive state of mind. Everything is affected. We rise with buddhas, we fall with Hitlers, but this rise and fall, for you, is a natural thing. A buddha is born: everyone rises with him. But this is not a conscious effort on your part.
You can use this opportunity. A buddha is there: a possibility has flowered into its essence, one consciousness has become a peak. Now this is a very good moment for your conscious effort. You will take less time, you will need less effort. It is as if the whole history is flowing toward a height. You can swim easily. But if you don’t use the opportunity, you will go to a height and you will come down, because with a buddha you will go high, with a Hitler you will come down. You will go on moving down and up. This coming up and down will be a natural force for you. For a buddha it is a conscious effort, for you it will be a natural force.
You can use it. Man can use it in two ways. When a buddha is there, now to rise is easy. The whole consciousness is open toward the peak. The peak is there. Deep down in you there are echoes of it. The music is heard deep down. You can follow it. If you make a small effort, you can attain buddhahood very easily.
There is a story, very meaningful:

Buddha attains the ultimate, then he remains silent for seven days. He has no feeling to say what he has attained. The silence seems total, unbreakable. Then Brahma becomes afraid he may not speak, and it happens rarely that someone attains buddhahood.
So the story says Brahma came to Buddha, bowed down at his feet and said, “You must speak. Don’t remain silent, you have to speak!”
Buddha said, “It seems useless, because those who can hear me and can understand me will understand even without me. And those who will not hear me, even if they listen, cannot understand me, will not understand me, even if I speak. So there seems to be no need.”
Brahma said, “But there are a few more you are leaving out. There are a few more who are just on the verge. If you speak, they will hear and take the jump. If you don’t speak, they may even fall back. They are just on the border. They will hear you and will take a jump.”

A buddha is there. This is a possibility to take a jump. You are affected whether you take the jump or not. You will be affected. But this being affected, without your conscious will, will be a natural force. And when a Hitler comes up, you will go down. If you go higher with Buddha, you will go down with anyone – because it is not your achievement, this going up. With a rising wave you go up, then with a falling wave you go down. But you can use the opportunity. When you are rising high, if you will it, then with a very small effort, you will attain more. So with a buddha, thousands of souls become buddhas.
I wonder whether you know it or not, that within five hundred years everything great, as far as religion is concerned, happened. Within five hundred years. Buddha – Gautama the Buddha – Mahavira, Socrates, Plato, Aristotle, Confucius, Lao Tzu, Moses, Zarathustra, Jesus, they all happened within five hundred years, in a particular period, when everything was rising high. Every great religion was born within those five hundred years.
Something mysterious was afoot, something very mysterious. Just in Bihar, in a very small place, in a very small province, when Buddha was there, there were eight persons of Buddha’s height. Just in small Bihar, eight persons! Mahavira was there, Buddha was there, Ajit Keshkambal was there, Belattiputta was there…eight such persons. And these are the known persons.

Someone asked Buddha, “You have ten thousand bhikkhus, ten thousand monks, with you. How many of them have attained buddhahood?”
Buddha said, “So many I cannot count.”
The questioner asked, “Then why are they silent? Why don’t we feel them? Why are they not famous?”
So Buddha said, “When I am speaking, there is no need for them to speak. And, moreover, when for the first time I attained buddhahood, I myself tried in every way to be silent. It was Brahma who asked me and persuaded me to speak. They have become silent. No one will know about them; even their names will not be known.”

One day Buddha came to his assembly of monks with a flower in his hand. He was to speak, but he would not speak. He just sat, and he continued for a long time. Everyone became puzzled and disturbed, and then they began to whisper in each others’ ears, “What is the matter? Why is he not speaking today?” He was just sitting there with a flower in his hand, a lotus flower, looking at it, totally absorbed in it.
Then someone said, “Are you not going to speak today?”
Buddha said, “I am speaking. Listen!” And he remained silent.
Then someone else asked, “We cannot understand what you are doing, sir. You are just looking at the flower and we have come to hear something from you.”
So Buddha said, “I have said many things to you which could be said. Now I am saying something which cannot be said. If someone understands, let him laugh.”
Only one person laughed, Mahakashyapa. He was not known before; no one knew about him. This is the only incident that is known. Mahakashyapa was his name.
Ananda is a known, very well-known disciple, Sariputta is a very well-known disciple, Maudgalyan is a very well-known disciple – Mahakashyapa was an absolutely unknown disciple. Neither Sariputta nor Ananda nor Maudgalyan could laugh. A very unknown man, no one knew about him, he laughed.
Buddha called him and said, “Mahakashyapa, come to me.” Buddha gave the flower to Mahakashyapa and said, “Whatsoever I could say I have said to others, and what I cannot say I say to you. Take this flower.”
This is the only incident known about Mahakashyapa, the only mention of his name.
But when Bodhidharma reached China seven hundred years after Buddha, he said, “I am a disciple of Mahakashyapa. Buddha was the first teacher, Mahakashyapa was the second teacher, and in that line I am the twenty-eighth.”
The Zen tradition in Japan says, “Mahakashyapa is our originator – the man who laughed and the man to whom Buddha gave the flower.”
In the night when everyone dispersed, everyone had gone, Ananda asked, “Who is this Mahakashyapa? We never knew about him – a very unknown and strange one.”
Buddha said, “How can you know about him? He has remained silent for years. And only he could laugh because he remained so silent. Only he could understand. It was a transmission without words, a communication without words. Only he could understand.”

When a buddha is there, with a very small effort of your will you can achieve much. When a buddha is not there, you are fighting against a current. When a Hitler or a Genghis Khan is there, much effort will be needed. Even then, success is very difficult.
Buddha is reported to have said, “Choose a right moment to be born” – choose a right moment to be born. “Choose a moment when a buddha is there.”

============================================================

Paripoorn chandra amrit rasaiki karanam naivedyam.

Accumulation of the nectar of the inner full moon is naivedya – the food offering.
You must have heard about the Taoist concept of yin and yang, the concept of polar opposites into one reality. Reality exists through polar opposites – through the positive and the negative, through the male and the female, through yin and yang.
Reality is a dialectical process. And when I say “dialectical process,” I mean it is not a simple process, it is very complex. A simple process means one element working; a dialectical process means two polar opposites working in one direction. And though they appear as opposites, they create a symphony, they create a musical harmony. And that harmony is reality.
Man and woman, they create humanity. Man alone is not humanity, neither is woman alone humanity. Human being – the music, the synthesis we call human being – is a dialectical phenomenon. Man and woman, they both work to create humanity, they both help to create humanity. And the way of their creating it is dialectical. They exist as polar opposites, and the inner tension between the two creates the energy for movement, for process, for further growth.
It is the same on every plane. If we go deep down with the physicist to the atom’s structure, inner structure, then again we find two polar opposites working there: the negative electricity and the positive electricity. Because of these two polar opposites, matter is created. If there is only positive electricity, the world will disappear immediately. If there is only negative electricity, there will be nothing. But negative electricity and positive electricity create an inner tension, and because of that inner tension matter exists.
It is the same in the inner being of man also. This sutra is concerned with that. We discussed how awareness creates an inner sun. Now this sutra talks about the creation of an inner moon. Sun is symbolic of the inner positivity and moon is symbolic of the inner negativity. Sun is the inner male and moon is the inner female. These words are symbolic, and for Indian yoga, particularly, they are very meaningful. So by sun is not meant the outer sun, nor by moon the outer moon. Those two words are used for the inner universe, sun and moon.
Indian yoga divides man into two parts: the sun part and the moon part. Even one breath is known as the sun breath and another breath is known as the moon breath. And one of the deeper findings is that if you stop the moon breath, and just breathe through the breath that is known as the sun breath, your body will become hot. And such great heat can be created, simply by using only one kind of breath, that it seems inconceivable in physiological terms. In Tibet there exists a heat yoga which uses only the sun breath, not using the moon breath at all – because the breath is continuously changing.
Western medical science has not yet taken note of it. Breathing is not a simple process; it is a dialectical process. You are changing your nostrils every hour, approximately every hour, forty minutes. Somewhere between forty and sixty minutes your nostril changes, you begin to take the breath from the other nostril; then again it changes. When you need more heat in the body – if you suddenly get angry – your sun breath starts. Yoga says that when you are angry, if you use your moon breath and stop the sun breath, you cannot be angry at all, because the moon breath creates a deep coolness inside.
The whole body is also divided between sun and moon, and the mind is also divided between sun and moon. So don’t take man as one, because nothing can exist as one. Everything exists through duality. You are divided in two: you have a negative part and you have a positive part. The positive is known as sun in Indian symbology, and the negative as moon. The negative is cool, silent, still. The positive is hot, vibrant with energy, active. The sun is the active part in you and the moon the inactive part in you.
And if the active and the inactive both come to a deep equilibrium, you are enlightened suddenly. If one is more emphatic, you have an imbalance; if both are of equal force they balance each other, they negate each other; and the moment both are of equal force, your inner balance is regained and you reach to a different reality – the reality of the nondual. That one, the nondual, can be felt only when both these dualities in you are balanced and you transcend them.
In the world we exist as duality. Beyond the world we exist as nonduality, one. You can think of yourself as a triangle: two angles exist in the world and the third angle exists beyond the world. Two angles belong to this, this world, and one angle belongs to that, the world of the brahman. But if these two are in an imbalance, you cannot go beyond them. You go beyond them only when they regain balance.
This balancing is nirvana, this balancing is moksha, this balancing is the centering. How does awareness work to balance this duality? And the moment this duality is balanced, you cannot be reborn again – you disappear from the world. You can be born again and again only if there is an imbalance. If the balance comes to totality, the balance becomes total, it is impossible to be born again. You disappear from the world. The body cannot exist then. Then you cannot re-enter a body again.
So first we will try to understand what this inner sun is and what this inner moon is, and then how they are balanced.
This sutra says:
Accumulation of the nectar of the inner full moon is naivedya – the food offering.
You need a full moon in you to offer to the divine as food. Only that can be the food for the divine, a full moon inside.
Awareness works in a double way: it creates a sun and it creates also a moon. We talked about how it creates a sun inside. When you become aware of whatsoever is happening in you, the innermost unconscious activities become enlightened. The very cells of your body become conscious. Your light, your consciousness, reaches to the very pores of your body. Just like the rays of the sun reaching to the earth, your inner sun, once awakened, begins to work on every cell of the body, every fiber, every nerve of the body. Your whole being is filled with light.
But this is only one part of awareness, this is one process of awareness: rays from your center going to your periphery, to the circumference. The more your rays go to the circumference, the cooler your center begins to be.
I don’t know whether you have heard of a particular theory about the sun, the outside sun. I don’t know whether it is right or not, but it is meaningful in helping to understand the inner reality. They say the sun at its deepest center is the coolest spot in the solar system. It is not hot. The heat is only on the periphery, just the circumference, not in the inner center of the sun. Because of helium gas around the sun, the heat is created; because of the helium and its chain explosion of atoms, the heat is created. And then the heat spreads to the solar family.
The sun has a body: it is the center, the solar family is the body. Our earth belongs to its body as a cell. The heat goes to the solar family, it spreads. But the sun in itself is a cold thing, absolutely cold, and its deepest center is the coldest spot in existence. It should be so, because reality exists in a polarity. If the sun is the hottest thing, it must have something inside it which balances its heat.
Just like a wheel moving on the street: the wheel moves, but in the center the hub on which it moves remains still. The movement must have something unmoving, nonmoving in the center, otherwise movement will not be possible.
In this world of manifestation, everything exists with its polar opposite. You are alive because you have death inside. You cannot be alive if you have no death inside. So don’t think that one day it suddenly happens and death comes to you. It is an inner growth; it is not something coming from the outside and happening to you. It is not something that you meet, that you encounter, no; it is something you are daily growing. One day the growth is complete and you are dead. It is an inner phenomenon. You are alive with a death center. You cannot be alive without a death center. Nothing exists without the polar opposite. Life and death are just two positive and negative realities.
So it looks logical, dialectical also, but it is not yet proved that the sun has a center which is the polar opposite to its heat on the circumference: a cold spot, an absolutely cold spot. It may be true, it may not be; that is irrelevant. But inside it is absolutely true.
When you become aware, the heat begins to travel towards your circumference. Each cell of your body will become heated, warm, because of the awareness penetrating. The second thing, the counterpart will be: your center of being will become cooler and cooler and cooler. That is the moon. This is the sun, this warmth spreading, this light spreading.
And you must know that light has two qualities: light and warmth. Heat is just concentrated light; light is nothing but heat dispersed. So when light travels to your body, every cell will become warm, enlightened, aware. Sleep is a cold thing, night is a cold thing. That’s why we sleep in the night; it is a cold thing. In the morning, with the rising sun, everything becomes warm, alive. Then it is difficult to sleep, it is easy to be awake.
When your circumference is cold, when your every body cell is cold, asleep, your center will be a hot spot. Because of that hot spot in the center you will be sexual, you will be angry, you will be greedy, and everything. Your center will be in a fever. When this heat begins to travel…of course, when the heat leaves your center it spreads. And the more it spreads, the less it is heat and the more it is light.
The sunrays on the earth are life-giving. They have traveled much. If you go nearer and nearer to them, they will become death-giving, because then they will not be warm, then they will be just pure fire.
If the heat is accumulated in the inner center, as it is, the whole body structure is just cold. You feel heat only in anger, in sex, in desire, in passion. But that is not light, simply heat, a feverish phenomenon. Because of this, sex is felt as a release – because you lose a certain quantity of heat and you are relieved, you lose a certain quantity of fever and you are released.
Because of this, militaries have not allowed their soldiers any sexual freedom – because if you allow sexual freedom to soldiers, they cannot fight. Their inner fever is released. Don’t allow them sexual freedom, then their inner fever is accumulated. That accumulated fever begins, automatically, to be violent.
That’s why a very deep phenomenon, a great riddle of history, can be solved. Whenever a society is affluent it begins to be sexually free. Only poor societies can be sex suppressive. Whenever a society is affluent, rich, you cannot suppress sex – because the food problem is solved, much energy is released. What to do with it? So the affluent society will become sexually free.
And the affluent society means a society which has progressed much technologically. Whenever any civilization comes to a point of affluence, sexual freedom is bound to be there, and then any less civilized society can win over this higher civilized society. So this has been always a riddle in history: a greater civilization will always be defeated by a barbaric, uncivilized society.
India was defeated continuously because of its affluence. Tartars, Berbers, Huns, Moghuls, Turks, they were all uncivilized societies – poor, poverty-stricken, sexually suppressed. They had much violence in them. You can see this in a modern phenomenon, in Vietnam. Americans could never win. Their youth is sexually free, they are less violent – they could not win in Vietnam. No affluent society can really win over any poor society. It can fight for longer periods, but cannot win. You can kill – kill the whole country – but you cannot win, because the very fighting spirit is not there.
America is now one of the most sexually free societies in all history. America cannot fight. Fighting is part of a suppressed sex. The inner fever must be accumulated in such quantities that you begin to be violent. Suppress sex and you will be violent. That’s why so-called saints are very violent in their behavior – angry, violent – because of suppressed sex. Then that fever has to be released in some way.
In sex you are releasing a particular amount of energy. They say in one sexual act you release one hundred and twenty calories of heat – one hundred and twenty calories you release in one sexual act! It is the same if you run for one mile, fast; you will release the same amount of calories, one hundred and twenty. That’s why there is much talk about whether sex can help heart disease. It can help. It releases energy. For persons who are well fed, it helps to delay heart disease. It releases energy, but it is not a solution. It is just a temporary arrangement, just creating a leakage in your system from which energy is released every day.
When you are angry your whole body is heated, becomes feverish. The center releases energy; it comes to the periphery. Ordinarily it is cold. The periphery is cold ordinarily and the center is hot. The reverse will be the case when awareness happens to you. When you meditate, go deep inside, when you become aware of every activity, everything will take a turn, an about-turn. Your periphery will become heated – not in anger, not in sex, not in greed, not in passion. It will lose its coldness, sleepy coldness. It will become warm, alive and aware. And because this energy is released to the periphery continuously, twenty-four hours a day, then you don’t need any anger, any sex.
A buddha doesn’t need anger. It is absolutely useless for him, because the very energy system has changed. Now he is using his heat for light, but you are using your light for heat. The same fuel can be used to burn your house and the same fuel can be used to light it. The fuel is the same, but the direction changes. The inner fuel, the inner energy, becomes fire, suicidal, burns you down, and ultimately you are just ashes. In the end, when death comes nearer you, you are just ashes, everything burnt out. You used your energy not as a light but as a fire.
It becomes fire if it is concentrated into the center and only temporarily released when it is overflowing. In a sudden shock, it comes to the periphery and is released. This is a very chaotic state. You go on accumulating it inside, then it is overflowing, then one day you have to throw it.
We go on rationalizing ourselves. When you get angry, you think someone has made you angry. No, really, you were ready, you were overflowing inside. You don’t know because you are not aware. You are overflowing with a certain amount of energy which needs to be released. Someone abuses you, insults you, and you get angry, you think, “This man is creating anger in me.”
No, this man is simply giving you a situation, an opportunity, to release the overflowing energy. In a way, he is your friend and a helper. If he is not there, you will be in a very difficult situation. If no one is giving you any opportunity to throw your energy, you will project, you will imagine something, and you will get angry with anything whatsoever.
People get angry with their shoes; they will throw them away. They can get angry with the door; they will be violent with it. They can be angry with anything. When no opportunity is given, they can get angry with themselves. They will begin to hurt themselves, harm themselves, or they will create some substitutes. We have created many.
Someone is just smoking. We think it is a simple thing – it is not. Now psychologists say it is a deep violence. You take the smoke in and then throw it out, you take the smoke in and then throw it out. It helps to release anger, violence, sex. We have many, many things. Persons who are violent will eat more; just by destroying the food they are releasing violence.
You may not have observed, but observe it: when you are loving you cannot eat more, when you are happy you cannot eat more, when you feel blissful you cannot eat more. Ordinarily it should not be so. It looks opposite: when one is happy we think one must eat more. No, a happy person will not eat more, cannot eat more, because eating is part violence. A happy person is not violent. When you are in love, you cannot eat more.
Two persons, when in love, unmarried, will not eat more – married they will begin to eat more, because love has disappeared. Now it is a violence. It is related with many deep things, because violence is expressed through teeth in animals and we are part animal. When an animal is violent, angry, the energy comes to the teeth and to the nails, because these are the instruments for an animal to be violent with.
The same happens still with us. When you are violent, your teeth, your fingers, your nails, are filled with heat, with energy. Now you have to release it. You can eat, you can use gum, you can smoke, you can take pan, now you need something to crush. So there are people who are crushing pan the whole day…the violence is released.
Even by continuously talking, violence is released. Women talk more than men, because men can be violent in other ways also that women cannot be. That is the only reason they talk more. They talk continuously, they talk madly, because man has other possibilities to be violent: in the office, with the car. Have you observed an angry man driving his car? He is releasing his anger through the accelerator. The car will speed up. He is releasing; the car is just a medium. Fifty percent of car accidents are not because of cars but because of drivers, not because of traffic but because of mental tension.
But women cannot release in so many ways. They have only one way: to go on talking. Doing something with the teeth and the lips much is released. An angry woman will break more saucers, more cups, unknowingly – unknowingly. Even she may be surprised why today everything is just breaking. Unconscious mind. Energy is in the hands: the energy wants to destroy something. So it is good to have breakable things in the house, it helps. Then before the husband is back, the wife is released. If you make everything unbreakable, it will break up families. Breakable things help families to continue. Now these are proved facts.
If you have feverish energy in the center, not transformed to the periphery, not used as light for the whole body and for your whole being, this is bound to happen. Every day you will accumulate energy, and then you will have to throw it. And this is nonsense! Your whole life you are doing this: accumulating, throwing; accumulating, throwing. What are you doing daily, twenty-four hours a day? Accumulating energy to throw. When energy is there, then the only problem is how to throw it: in sex, in anger, in greed – how to throw it? When energy is thrown, then the only problem is how to accumulate it.
What sort of life is this? A vicious circle. With awareness, the whole mechanism changes. With awareness, every moment your inner center is sending its energy to every pore of your body. And your body is not a small thing, it is a miniature universe. As above, so below: everybody is a small universe. And when I say “small” I feel guilty because, really, it is not small. It is as vast as the universe. But because of our language, there are problems. The universe appears vast and your body appears small.
What is the difference between the two? They say that if we can throw out all space from the earth, if we can compress it, and all the space, the vacant space in it, is thrown out, our earth will just be like a small ball. If we can throw out all the empty space from the Himalayas, it can be put into a matchbox. The material is not much, matter is not much, matter is very small. Only the emptiness in it…
So how to judge a thing, whether it is big or small? A very small thing can be blown up to any size if we put space in it. If we put as much space in your body as there is in the earth, you will be one earth. So all the differences are of spaces, empty spaces, no differences really.
But when I say “a small universe,” I mean only this: that everything that exists in the universe exists in you also. Whatsoever the measure may be, but exactly everything exists in you also.
So when your solar center, your sun, releases energy…and it releases only in two ways. Either you are unconscious: then it releases into sex, anger, greed and other diseases. Or, if you are conscious, through this consciousness, this heat is transformed into light: then it releases as light. Then you are under a shower of light continuously. Your every pore, your every cell, is bathed – a continuous shower of light. When this happens, your inner center begins to be cool and cool and cool and cooler, and ultimately it becomes the coldest spot.
Hindus have a myth that Shankara lives on Kailash. Kailash is the coldest mythological spot, the coldest peak, the highest peak, always covered with snow. This is just a symbolic way of saying you also have the coldest spot, the Kailash, in you. But you can know it only when the heat is transformed into light, never before. And the more you become aware, the more the heat is transformed into light. Then you begin to feel a moon inside. You begin to feel a cool, silent pool.
This sutra says:
Accumulation of the nectar of the inner full moon…
In the beginning, of course, you will feel it and miss it. It is just like the first-day moon, the second-day moon, the third-day moon: you feel it and it is gone. And then it grows…then comes the full-moon night. Just like this, this inner spot of coolness grows. As your consciousness grows, as your heat is transformed into light, as your periphery becomes enlightened, as your each and every cell is filled with light and becomes aware and awake, this inner moon grows.
Sometimes you feel it and sometimes you miss it. Sometimes suddenly there is an inner cool breeze. You know something has happened inside. You feel it, but you miss it again. Then it goes on growing. Ultimately, when in you there is no unconsciousness left, when your total energy has become light, you come to know the full moon.
This full moon Buddha has talked about in negative terms, because it is the negative pole. So Buddha says when this inner silence is achieved, it is nirvana. The word is very meaningful in reference to this sutra. Nirvana means cessation of the flame – a lamp is burning and then the flame disappears. When your heat is transformed totally into light, there is no flame. That’s why the moon symbol is used: the moon has light, but no flame. That’s why its light is cool, with no flame, with no fire. Light is there without any flame. The flame has disappeared.
When first one becomes acquainted with the sun, the light becomes like a flame, burning hot. So if you analyze the life, the inner life, of a Buddha, or of a Jesus, or of a Mahavira, many things will become apparent which are hidden ordinarily. For example, whenever a person like Buddha is born the early life will be very revolutionary, because the moment one enters inside the first experience is a fiery flame. The older Buddha grows, the more the inner coolness is felt, the more perfect the moon becomes. Revolution is lost; then Buddha’s words are not revolutionary.
Jesus couldn’t get this opportunity. He was killed when he was still a revolutionary. That’s why, if you compare Buddha’s sayings with Jesus’ sayings, there is a clear-cut distinction and difference. Jesus’ sayings look like those of a young man, hot. Buddha’s early sayings are also like that, but he lived to be eighty. He was not killed.
There are reasons. And one reason is this – India knew it always, that this happens – whenever a person goes in, the first expression is fiery, revolutionary, rebellious. That’s why India never killed anyone. That’s why India could never behave as Greeks behaved with Socrates and Jews behaved with Jesus. India knew much. It had known many, many such persons. It knew. It is natural: whenever a buddha enters into himself, the first experience will be revolutionary. He will burst open, explode into a fiery flame. But then the flame will disappear and ultimately there will be only a moon, silent, cool, with no fire but only light.
Jesus was killed. That’s why Christianity still remains incomplete. Christianity was based on the early Jesus – Jesus when he was just a flame. That’s why Christianity has remained incomplete. Buddhism is complete. It has known Buddha in all the stages. It has known Buddha’s moon in all the stages, from the first day to the full-moon light.
This is a misfortune for the West. This has proved one of the greatest misfortunes in history, because Jesus was killed when he was thirty-three, just a flame. The flame would have turned into moonlight, but the opportunity was not given. And the reason was only this: the Jews were not aware of the inner phenomenon.
India knew many, it had known many buddhas. And it is always the case: whenever someone enters in, first one feels the fire, the flame; the revolutionary spirit comes up. If one goes on in and in, it dissolves, and then there is only silence, a moonlight silence.
This sutra says: Accumulate the nectar of the inner full moon…
This silence, this cool silence of the moon, Hindus have called nectar, the amrit, the elixir. It is not to be found somewhere else, it is in you. The nectar is in you. Once you are established in this nectar, once you are in this pool of cool moonlight, when you are a full moon inside, you have known both the polarities. You have known life, you have known death. You have known the sun, you have known the moon. You have known both the polarities, life and death. And once you have known both you have transcended both. That’s why it is called the nectar, amrit.
Now you will not die. Now you are drunk with elixir – you cannot die. But you will not be alive in the old sense either. You have died in the old sense, you are born into a new meaning. Now death will not be a death and life will not be a life. Now you will be beyond both.

I have heard about Tanka, a Zen master, who one day declared before his disciples, “Buddha was never born. This whole story is just false, this whole Buddha legend is just false. He was never born.”
The disciples were just perplexed. “What does it mean? It seems he has gone mad. Every day he himself has been teaching the life of Buddha, the birth and everything, and suddenly one day he says, ‘This whole thing is nonsense. He was never born.’” And he left the platform and went into his hut.
The disciples gathered around his hut and they asked, “What are you saying? So what about that which you were teaching to us always, your whole life?”
Tanka said, “Tanka is no more. He was never born, so the whole legend is false. The teaching of Tanka and your listening to Tanka is just false. Someone has created a fiction. Don’t be deceived.”
Then they were even more perplexed: “It may be that Buddha was not born, but Tanka is there, already standing before us.”
Tanka laughed and said, “That which is born, that which was born, was not Buddha.”

In India we have two names: Gautama Siddhartha is the name given by the parents. Then one day he becomes enlightened, his consciousness flowers, blooms. Then he uses another name: Gautama the Buddha. Buddha means the enlightened one. This second name doesn’t belong to Gautama at all. Gautama is just a situation in which this buddha happened. And this buddha has not happened really today – it has been always there. It has been recognized today. Gautama has come to recognize today something that was already and always there, that buddha.
This inner phenomenon is beyond birth and death. This is never born and never will it die, because that which is born can die, that which is not born cannot die. Death needs birth as a prerequisite, a necessary prerequisite. You cannot die if you are not born. With this inner phenomenon – when sun and moon are balanced, when the dialectic is finished, when the synthesis is complete – you come to feel in yourself something which is eternal.
That’s why the sutra says: Accumulation of the nectar of the inner full moon is naivedya… Now you have become food yourself. Now you can offer yourself to the divine. Now you are the food. But now you are eternity.
And why is it called food, naivedya? Because when you are eternal, you can become the food of the eternal. And by food the ordinary meaning also is implied. When you take food, it becomes one with you. It becomes your blood, it becomes your bones, it becomes you. You are your food.
So when you have come to know this inner reality, the eternal reality, you can offer it as food to the universe, to the existence. It is meant thereby that now you can become bones of the universe, you can become blood of the universe. Now you can be one with it, just like food becomes one with you. The meeting is complete. Become food for the divine, then you are naivedya, then the offering can be accepted.
But you cannot offer your body as the food. It will be food, but for the vultures, not for the divine. This cannot be offered as food for the divine. Your body comes out of the earth and goes back to the earth. It can only be eaten by the earth again: dust unto dust to return. This body cannot be offered to the divine.

One young seeker comes to Gautam Buddha. He says, “I have come to offer myself to you. Accept me.”
Buddha asks him, “What are you offering – your body? But that is already offered, and the earth will claim it, so how can you offer it to me? What are you offering? Tell me exactly.”
The man is confused. He says, “Whatsoever I have, I offer to you.”
Buddha asks him, “What do you have? What is it that belongs to you? Do your thoughts belong to you? They belong to the society, your mind belongs to the society. Your body belongs to your parents, to the earth, to the sky, to water, to fire, to many things – to the five elements. What do you have that you can offer to me?”
The man cannot answer because he has nothing else, he cannot think of anything else. So Buddha says, “Don’t offer now. First find it out, what you are. And the moment you find it, it is already offered. Then there is no need to offer.”

This inner balance that is known from finding the sun and from finding the moon, when you know them both, they balance, and in that balance you escape from the duality. In that balance only do you escape from the duality. And then the third angle of the triangle is touched. For the first time you are above yourself, the overself. Now you can look down at yourself, at your sun, your moon, your body, your soul, your positivity, your negativity, your male, your female. Now you can look down at yourself, at the whole world of duality, multidimensional duality – and now you can become naivedya, the food offering.
Now there is no need even to offer: you are already offered. Now there is no need to ask to be accepted: you are already accepted. You are one. Just as food becomes one with ourselves, we become one with the divine. And by divine I mean the whole, the totality, everything, the very existence.
So what to do? Transform heat into light – that is the mantra. Transform heat into light. Don’t use heat as heat, use it as light. When you think anger is coming to you, close your eyes and meditate on anger, what anger is. Dig deep inside; find out the source from where it is coming.
What we are doing ordinarily is just the opposite. When we get angry we begin to think about the object of anger, who has created it, not the source of anger, from where it is coming. When you get angry, close your eyes. This is the right moment to meditate. Close your eyes, go in, and find out from where this anger is coming. Follow it to the very source. Go deep, and you will come to the source of heat from where the accumulated energy is bursting forth to go out.
Observe it. Don’t indulge in it, because if you indulge in it, it will be thrown out – without being transformed. And don’t suppress it, because if you suppress it it will be thrown back again to the original source which is overflowing. It cannot absorb it. It will be thrown back again with a more forceful movement. So don’t suppress it and don’t indulge in it. Just be conscious. Move inward to the source.
This very movement slows down the process. This very observation transforms the quality of anger, because this calm observation is an antidote. Anger and this calm observation are different phenomena. When this calm observation enters into anger, it changes the energy, the very chemical composition of it, and the heat becomes light. That is the change: heat becomes light.
Then this anger is neither thrown back to the original source – which cannot contain it because it is overflowing – nor is it thrown to the object, which is just a wastage, a foolish wastage. Then this energy is neither moved out to the object of anger, nor is it suppressed back to the original source. With observation, this energy becomes diffused. It moves to the periphery of your body as light; diffused, it moves as light. And the very anger becomes ojas, the very anger becomes light, inner light.
So don’t be disturbed and don’t be disappointed if you have much anger. That only shows you have much energy. A person born without anger cannot be transformed; he has no energy. So be happy that you have energy, but don’t misuse it. Energy can be misused, it can be transformed. Energy in itself is neutral. It will not tell you what to do with it – you have to decide. This is the secret science of inner alchemy: to change heat into light, to change coal into diamonds, to change baser elements into gold.
These are just symbols. Alchemists were not really concerned with changing baser metals into higher metals, but they had to hide and they had to make an esoteric, secret symbology, because it was very difficult in those days to talk about the inner science and not to be murdered and killed. Jesus was killed – he was an alchemist. And the Christianity that developed, that followed Jesus, went quite against him. The Christian church began to kill and murder those who were again trying alchemy.
This word alchemy is very beautiful. Our chemistry is born out of alchemy. The word chemistry comes from alchemy, but alchemy itself is a very deep and significant word. Alchemy comes from Egypt. The old name of Egypt was Khem and Al Khem means “the secret science of Egypt.” And the Egyptians were really deeply in the alchemy of inner transformation, how to transform the inner chemistry.
Many Egyptian mummies are preserved. They are the oldest, most ancient mummies, and still scientists are not capable, not able, to probe into how they are preserved, why and how. Why were they preserved? But that why we can guess – our so-called history is nothing but a guess. And about esoteric things it is always a fallacious guess, why they were preserved.
But more problematic is the how, by what chemical process they were preserved. They are still fresh, as if the man has just died. If there were any outer chemical process, our chemistry could know it; we are more developed chemically than old Egypt. But the real thing is that these bodies were preserved, not by any outer chemical process, but by this inner alchemy.
If your sex energy, which is the source of life, can be transformed inwardly, then your body can be preserved for any length of time very easily. If your sex energy is transformed, then your body can be preserved for a million years. If the cells of your body lose sex, then the body can be preserved, because birth comes through sex and death comes through sex. Your freshness, the youngness of the body, comes through sex, and then the deterioration comes through sex.
And they were preserved, the kings, emperors preserved themselves – not because man has always been thinking in terms of ego to preserve himself, as historians say, or as Egyptologists say. That is not the case. Totally different is the secret. They were preserved only so they could recognize themselves.
When a man is born again in another body, if his old body is preserved it helps further inner progress. But it is useful to preserve the old body only if it was transformed alchemically; otherwise it is of no use. Because if you change your body inwardly, the body becomes a laboratory, it is a lab. It is not then just a body. You have been working inside, experimenting inside. You know this body from the inside, not only from the outside.
We know our bodies only from the outside. Whatsoever the mirror tells is our only knowledge, not from the inside. Our knowledge is just like someone comes around this house and looks at it and goes, then he says, “I know it.” He has never come in; he has never looked from the inside. We look at our bodies from the outside, never from the inside.
If you begin to transform your anger, your sex, you will begin to look at your body from the inside. Then your body is a great experiment, a great laboratory, very complex, and you would like to preserve it for further growth. When you enter another body, you can learn much from your old body. It was a great experiment, you did many things with it. You were successful in some things, you were a failure in some things.
Now you have again a new body, a new laboratory. If the old is preserved you will not have to begin from ABC. If the old is preserved, this is a record. Death interrupted, now you can proceed. You are not to proceed from the beginning again, you can proceed from the point where death stopped in the last life.
So only Egyptians and Tibetans, they have preserved bodies for this reason, but only those bodies which were experimenting deep down inside. Otherwise it is useless to preserve your body. You will not even be able to recognize it.
Lenin’s body is preserved in Moscow, but he cannot even recognize it. If he is born again, he cannot recognize it, because the body was never used as a laboratory. He never knew it. He was just acquainted with it in the mirror, never with this body itself.
This process is alchemical. Observe anger, and anger is transformed into light. Observe sex, and sex is transformed into light. Observe any inner phenomenon which creates heat – any inner phenomenon which creates heat, observe it – and through observation it becomes light.
And if your every heat phenomenon is transformed into light, you will come to feel the inner moon. And when there is no heat left, then you have accumulated the nectar of the full moon. And through this nectar you become immortal. Not in this body, not with this body: you become immortal because you transcend life and death both. Then you are naivedya, then you are a food offering to the divine, to the total.

============================================================

Osho,
What are the reasons why very few persons in the world are interested in transforming their inner heat into spiritual light? Do you feel that the present generation is capable of creating enlightened ones like Krishna, Lao Tzu and Christ?
Man is freedom, absolute freedom. So spirituality is a choice. There is no force compelling you to be spiritual. There is no cause forcing you to transform. If there is any cause forcing you to transform, then no spirituality is possible.
Causality is materialism. You seek food because hunger is there. It forces you, there is no choice. You cannot choose whether to seek or not – you have to. Spirituality is not that type of seeking. No one is forcing you. You alone have to choose.
Spirituality is a choice. It is not causality. Everything else is causality: there is a cause and the effect follows. The effect has no freedom. It is caused. Spirituality is beyond causality. It is not caused by anything, it is your inner choice. You can choose, you may not choose. For lives together you may not choose it – no one is going to force you.
This has to be understood. And this is a very significant thing, because if everything is caused, then I say there is no spirituality. Then science can cause you to become spiritual. If the cause is present, then the effect will follow. Then a buddha can be caused: we can create the cause and then you will be a buddha.
But we cannot create any situation in which you can become a buddha. And we cannot create any situation in which you can be stopped from becoming a buddha. You are free. Any moment you can choose to be, and you may not choose for lives together.
This has been a long discussion between materialism and spirituality. This is the basic debate, not whether God exists or not. That is not the basic debate, because one can be spiritual without any God. Buddha never believed in any God, Mahavira denies any existence of God, but no one is as spiritual as Mahavira or Buddha.
So God is not the most significant thing, even the soul is not the most significant thing. Buddha says there is no self, no soul, and he is spiritual par excellence. Then what is the basic thing in spirituality? It is the concept of freedom: whether man is free to go beyond humanity or not.
If everything is caused, then there is no freedom for you. You have a certain body because of certain causes: a certain father, a certain mother, a certain country, a certain climate, a certain heredity. You have a certain body; it has been caused. You have a certain mind because of a certain country, a certain culture, a certain education. You have this mind because of certain causes. You speak a particular language because it has been caused. If you were born in China and were never taught to speak any other language than Chinese, it is difficult to conceive that you could speak any other language. Language is caused. Certain factors are needed, then you will speak a certain language.
So there is no freedom in these things. Only spirituality is uncaused. And that is the debate between science and religion, because science says, “Nothing is possible which is uncaused. Everything has a causality. You may know it, you may not know it; that is another thing. The causal factor may be unknown, but everything is caused.” This is the contention of the scientific approach toward life: “Everything is caused. The cause may be known or not known, but everything is caused.”
If everything is caused, then there is no freedom. Then if a buddha is a buddha, it is not any achievement of his. He was caused! And anyone else in his situation, X, Y, Z, will become a buddha. Only the situation has to be there.
So Buddha is replaceable then. Anyone, if put into the same situation, will become a buddha – just like water boils at a particular degree, any water. So the water is irrelevant, which water: from the Ganges or from the Godavari or from anywhere, any water will boil at a particular degree, evaporate at a particular degree. At a hundred degrees water will evaporate, in any country, in any climate, in any age. So which water is irrelevant: at one hundred degrees heat, evaporation is caused. So use any water, A, B, C.
Science says it is the same with Buddha: “Put any man, A, B, C, in the same situation. Given the same situation a buddha will be caused. We don’t know the situation yet; that’s another thing. We will know one day. And it is absurd to teach someone: ‘Be a buddha!’ No one can be. But create the situation. If you say to water, ‘Evaporate!’ water cannot evaporate, but create the situation and the water evaporates.”
Water has no freedom to choose. The situation is the significant factor. If the situation is there, automatically water will evaporate.
Science says, “Man’s situation is very complex. It is not so simple as creating heat for the water to evaporate. It is complex, but still everyone is caused, everything is caused.”
If this is the case, then there is no freedom. Really, in this century, this thought has become very deeply rooted in the human mind. Because of this, now psychologists say, “No criminal is a criminal – he is caused. And no buddha is a buddha – he is caused.” Everyone is just a slave; there is no responsibility. With the concept of freedom gone, there is no responsibility.
So when you ask me why people are not interested in transforming their life, their inner energy, into spiritual light, the why is irrelevant, cannot be asked. With freedom, why disappears. You can ask why this water is not evaporating; then you have to find out, in the situation, why. Go deep down in the situation, and you will find out the answer why this water is not evaporating. Some factor is missing. Bring the factor in and the water will evaporate.
Why is this man ill? Diagnose, and something will be found, and the answer will be there. Why is this man not spiritual? The question is not valid, because with the question why you assume that somewhere in the situation something must be there which is obstructing the process. There is no factor. If you want to be spiritual, you can be. If you don’t want, it is up to you. It is up to you.
Even all the situations given, a buddha cannot be produced, cannot be manufactured. Really, in the life of Buddha, there are many things which will help us.

Buddha was born. He was the only son to his father, and he was born when his father was very old. The father asked the astrologers, “What is going to be the fate of my son?”
The astrologers said, “There are two possibilities: either he will become a great emperor, a chakravartin, emperor of the whole world, or he will become a sannyasin, a renunciate.”
The father asked, “What type of astrology is this? Tell me certainly what he is going to become!”
They said, “This is the only possible thing we can predict. Either he will become a sannyasin, or he will become a chakravartin.”
These are polar opposites: emperor of the whole world and a sannyasin, a monk, a beggar on the street. Everything else comes in between. These are the polar opposites.
So the father was worried and asked the pundits of the court. He called a great meeting of all the wise men of his capital and asked them what to do so that his son would not become a sannyasin, so that he would live in the world and would not leave the world. “What type of situation should be given to him and what type of education so that he never feels any urge toward spirituality?”
This was a great experiment, an experiment in causing a person to be a particular thing: “He must be a great emperor. And both the possibilities are open, so how to close one possibility and how to help only one possibility for his growth?”
They decided. They must have been very scientific. Never was such an experiment done before and never after, a very great experiment in human destiny. So they planned the whole thing. The childhood of Buddha was a planned childhood, absolutely planned. What he should eat, what he should do, with whom he should talk, who should teach him, where he should move, everything was planned.
There were great, wise old men. They said, “He must not see any suffering. He must not see any old man, he must not see any diseased man. He must not see illness, poverty. He must not become aware of the great suffering life is. He must be in a world of dreams, utopia, euphoria. He must live in illusions so real that he never feels the urge to leave the world.”
So three palaces were built for him, one for each season. In his gardens not even a dry leaf was allowed. In the night everything dying would be thrown away. He never saw a flower dying. He would see only flowers that were young and fresh. No old man was allowed to move wherever Buddha was, Gautama was. No old man was allowed to move there, only young, beautiful, healthy men and women.
All the beautiful girls of the capital were brought for his service; they would serve him. And there was music and song, and his whole life was just a singsong, just a dreamy life. Absolute planning was possible because he was a king’s son. When he became young he had not seen any old man, any ill man, any dead man. He didn’t know that death existed. Of course, when there is no death, no old age, no suffering, where is the question of becoming a renunciate? Why renounce the world? The world is as beautiful as you can wish.
He lived in this dreamland…and then suddenly everything shattered. You cannot go on like this. It is such a false thing, you cannot continue in it. One day or another, something will enter in and will shatter the whole thing. And it happened that because of this planning, I say because of this planning, when he came to know the facts of life, it was a great shock. It is not such a great shock to us; we are accustomed. He was not accustomed at all, so when for the first time he saw an old man, he asked, “What has happened to this man?” When he saw for the first time a dead body, the whole dreamworld disappeared.
We see these things every day. We become insensitive, accustomed. But he was not accustomed, so he asked, “What has happened to this man?”
He had to be answered, and death was such a shock, great shock. There was such a big gap between his life and the fact of death, that he is reported to have said, “If this man is dead, then the whole life is meaningless. Then I am also going to be dead? Then everything is useless. If death is the end, then life is meaningless. So I must go and find that which is deathless, if there is such a thing. And if there is not such a thing, then we are living only in dreams, wasting time, wasting energy, wasting ourselves.”
The father had had a plan in his mind. He had been trying to cause, he was trying to force, a particular alternative. But the result was quite the contrary, because when you force a particular thing, the inner freedom begins to rebel. Buddha’s life was a manufactured life, artificial, false, unreal. And because everything was forced upon him, the inner freedom must have revolted. Because of that inner freedom he moved into quite the opposite polarity. Buddha’s father was just unable to understand what had happened. He had done everything in his power, and then the whole plan failed.

You cannot cause man to be something. And if you can cause man to be something, then there is no humanity. Man is the uncaused factor in the world. So I cannot say why, because if I can say, “Because of this, man is not spiritual, so provide the factor and man will be spiritual,” then spirituality becomes just part of a great economics. Supply this and the demand will be fulfilled. I create a demand and the supply will be there.
No, no such thing can be done with man. Spirituality is not a commodity. And because of this, because spirituality means freedom, so few people become spiritual – because you never use your freedom. Rather, on the contrary, you go on fettering yourself into slaveries, because slavery is convenient, very convenient. Slavery is convenient, comfortable. Freedom is inconvenient, uncomfortable.
When everyone is a slave, you can exist with everyone if you are a slave. If you begin to act as a free agent, you become maladjusted. The whole world has progressed only through maladjusted individuals. The adjusted ones are always orthodox, traditional. They always do what all the others are doing. They are adjusted.
Freedom means you begin to move in a direction no one is moving in. Fear grips you. You begin to feel uneasy. You cannot be certain because no one is moving there. Because freedom is such a responsibility, and such a dangerous responsibility, you go on deceiving yourself. At the most you choose one slavery over another, you go on substituting slaveries.
One Hindu becomes a Christian, one Christian becomes a Hindu: they change slaveries. One man belongs to this party, and then he leaves it and thinks, “I am free,” and begins to belong to another party. We simply change bondages. A new bondage is not a freedom. Freedom means with no bondage, moving with no bondage. That means moving moment to moment without any certainty, moving into insecurity. We are always interested in securities.
Only two or three days ago, one old lady was here. Her husband is doing meditation, deeply. Now she has become worried because he has become more silent. She came to ask me, “My husband has become more silent, and I fear that if this goes on he may become a sannyasin. He may leave us, he may renounce us, so stop my husband from doing meditation!”
I asked her whether he has become a worse man than he was before. She said, “No, he has become good. He is not angry now as he was before. He is more loving, more compassionate. But the whole family has become disturbed, a fear that he may leave us.”
This fear is not only the fear of the wife. I asked her husband also. He said, “I myself have become uneasy, because the silence is going in and as the silence is going in everything has begun to look different. My family doesn’t look at all as if it is mine – as if it is someone else’s family. I feel more compassion for the children, but now they are not mine. I am doing everything for them, and I will go on doing it, but it is as if I am doing it in a play, in a drama. I am not involved. So I myself have become afraid. If this goes on, then anything can happen. Any day I may leave them.”
This fear of the unknown! A fixed pattern was there, now a new factor has entered in. And that new factor is so alive it will change everything. So he asked me, “If you tell me to, I will stop meditation. And in my family, everyone will be happy if I stop it.”
You are afraid of your freedom. Everyone else is also afraid of your freedom. So we have a society of slaves, and in slavery we have such deep investments. That’s why we don’t move toward freedom.
Every moment you can choose. You can choose spirituality every moment, or you can choose old habits. But to be with old habits is easy. You know them, you have lived them, nothing is new. With the new you are in the unknown, in the dark. You have to learn again. So a person who is moving in freedom has to be a learner every moment. And he cannot rely on the past. The past will not help.
And we are all past-oriented only because the past helps. We are habit-oriented. This is the mechanism of the inner mind. Whenever you know something, you need not bother about it. When you know something as a habit, it is transferred from your consciousness to your robot mechanism inside; to the mechanical part of your being it is transferred. Then you need not bother about it. The mechanical part will go on doing it.
If you are a driver, you go on talking, you go on thinking, you can go on singing, or you can put on your radio, and drive. You are not driving – the robot part, the mechanical part, is driving. You will be needed only when something new happens, some accident, suddenly; then you will be required. Otherwise you are not required at all. You can be at ease somewhere else. You need not be in your car at all.
When you are driving mechanically, you are not there. You may have reached the destination already; only the robot part, the mechanical part, is driving. Your soul can fly to the stars or to the clouds, anywhere…the robot part is doing everything. This gives you a feeling of convenience. So with everything routinized, you feel convenient. With anything new, you have to be conscious, aware. When you are learning to drive, what is the problem? Why do you feel so much discomfort in learning? Because you have to be conscious.
Unconsciousness is such a drug. Consciousness is such an effort. When you learn something, you have to be conscious every moment. That consciousness is felt as strain. It is not, but because we are always finding something mechanical, it appears to be. The person who is thinking of spirituality must think in terms of awareness, more and more awareness. That is the reason. Awareness comes only when you go on facing new factors.
Biologists say that animals live in a world where awareness is not needed, a routine circle. They perform acts that are exactly alike. One animal’s birth is not different in any way from another’s – death not different, sex not different. Everything is similar, because everything is done by instinct. One bird making a nest, another bird making a dam, another bird making something else: they make through instinct. No learning is needed, they never are taught. It is just their robot part, inherent in their cells. They go on doing….
Even if a bird is hatched without its parents there, and no other birds are allowed to meet him, when the time is ripe he will begin to make a nest. And the nest will be the same, exactly the same, as for centuries and centuries his parents have been making. No one has taught him, no awareness is needed. It is just in the cells, instinctive, a mechanical thing. He will do it.
With man, that’s the difficulty. Man has to be taught everything, everything. Now biologists say that soon, after this century, we will have to teach sex, we will have to train, because now even sex is not as instinctive as it was. So you may see an eruption, an explosion, of sex books all over the world. Just as there are books on how to learn driving, now how to love – books entitled How to Love, How to Achieve Perfect Sex.
No animal needs anything to know about sex. Why man? With man everything has to be learned. Why? Because the robot part in man is secondary, and consciousness has come in which has become primary, the central force. You have to learn everything. Then choice comes in. You have to choose what to learn and what not to learn.
Spirituality will be your greatest choice. It is up to you. You may choose to look at the world in a spiritual way, you may choose to look at the world in a materialist way. And no one will tell you, “Don’t choose.” No one can force you. And if you choose the materialist outlook you will have a different life. If you choose the spiritualist outlook, you will have a totally different life. This is freedom.
Biologists say that this consciousness came into human life because long ago, at least ten million years ago, some apes, the forefathers of man, came down from their trees and began to walk on two legs, not on four. Instead of on four, they began to walk on two legs, and the two hands were released.
With these two hands released many things happened, and the greatest that happened was that the factor of awareness came in. Because when apes were on their trees, they were not in any danger. They were secure in their trees. No lion could kill them, no tiger could attack them. They were secured in their trees. They were moving in the trees from one tree to another, and that was a mechanical thing, inherent, hereditary.
Then, it is an unknown factor yet, x, why certain apes came down to earth. Many reasons are possible. It seems either there was a sudden population explosion and they were so many that they had to find somewhere new to live – trees were less and they became more – or suddenly there were no rains for many years and trees died and became dry and they had to come down. But whatsoever may have happened, these are all guesses.
Someone has suggested just now, a great scientist, he has suggested that it seems that humanity was born out of illness. Some apes became so ill because of an attack of a certain virus, a certain illness, these apes became so ill that they could not live by hanging on the trees. They became so weak that they had to come to the earth. It is possible. But whatsoever may have been the basic cause, this much is certain: when apes came down to the earth they had to be more alert. Their mechanical habits wouldn’t do. Their inherited instincts wouldn’t do. They had to walk on an unknown territory. The very walking, the stature, the posture, was so new; their bodies were not accustomed to it. With two legs walking, they became bipeds from quadrupeds. In their cells there was no knowledge about it.
That’s why still, when a man is born, a child is born, he has to learn to walk – still! It is not instinctive. A horse is born, he can run. A calf is born, he can run. No need to learn to walk. But man has to learn to walk. And if you put a small child somewhere where no one walks and he cannot imitate, he will not walk for his whole life.
In certain wolves’ caves, some children have been found who have grown up with wolves. They cannot walk. Just four or five years back, in a forest in U.P., one boy of fourteen was found in a community of wolves. They must have taken him from the village, and then he was brought up by them. Fourteen years old! He couldn’t walk, he was not a biped, he was still a quadruped. He would walk on all fours, and he would walk like a wolf, not like a man.
Walking is still an effort, so when a child walks parents are so happy. This is the reason, because this is something valuable, an achievement. We have in our language many things which show this attitude. We say someone is standing on his legs: “He is standing on his own legs.” Something valuable, something worthwhile, something to be appreciated. We condemn someone when we say, “You are still not standing on your own legs.”
Because man came into a new situation, from the trees to the earth – everything was new, and the robot would not work, and the instinct would not help – that’s why intelligence came up. He had to be aware, and he had to be aware every moment. There were many dangers all around. He was surrounded by enemies, and he was weak because no instinct would help now. This dangerous situation was the first spurt of alertness. He had to be alert.
Now we have again created a very, very secure state of affairs, so you can be just like a robot. There is no need to be alert. That’s why the sharpness, the alertness, the awareness, has to be chosen again, and you have to put yourself into new dangers. Not that you move into a jungle or you begin to live with wild animals; that is not real danger. You can accustom yourself to it, it can become a robot part. The only danger now for man is to live moment to moment without the help of the past, to live moment to moment in the present, alert, aware, conscious. This is going to be your choice, with no cause.
Look at it in one other way. Science is causal; that means past-oriented. If something is to be found, science will go to the past. If you are ill, science will go to your past history, case history, to see why this illness happened. Science cannot move to the future; it moves always to the past. If you are blind, science will go to your past, to your parents’ past. It moves to the past. It goes to find out the cause, then the effect can be explained.
Religion is future-oriented, not past-oriented, so why cannot be answered in scientific terms. It is future-oriented. Can you understand it? It is difficult. It is not because something is causing you to be spiritual; rather, something is calling you to be spiritual – not causing you but calling you. Spiritual persons have always said, “A certain call has come to me.” The call comes from the future, not from the past. It is end-oriented, not origin-oriented.
The freedom is there to choose. What is going to be your destiny, you can choose it. What you are going to achieve and to be, you can choose it. You feel hungry, you seek food: this is caused. If you feel inner tensions and then choose meditation, this is caused. Then your meditation is a scientific effort. If you say, “I don’t know why, but there is a certain calling, a call to me. I have to move in this direction. I feel an unknown fragrance. It is not coming from my past, but something from the future, inviting me, something unknown inviting me. I will move. It is dangerous, because I don’t know what is going to happen. I cannot be sure what the consequence will be. I move….” It is a jump.
And, remember, this is not so only in this age. This has always been so and this always will be so.
You ask me: “Do you feel that the present generation is capable of creating enlightened ones like Krishna, Lao Tzu and Christ?”
Spirituality is not concerned with time at all, time or age. A Lao Tzu is born not because of a particular time; a buddha is born not because of a particular age. There were so many in Buddha’s age, but only one became the Buddha. The age was the same to all, the time was the same to all.
Time is irrelevant for spirituality, because spirituality exists in eternity, not in time. Any moment is as good as any other. You can be a buddha this very moment. Time is absolutely innocent. Time neither helps nor hinders. It will not say, “What are you are going to do? It cannot happen. This is the twenty-first century. This cannot happen in this century.” Time has no determining capacity for spirituality. For other things it has.
For example, you cannot fly in the sky in an airplane in Buddha’s age. You will have to move in a bullock-cart, because only after a certain evolution is the airplane possible. Now you can move in an airplane, but you cannot go just now to other solar families. Whatsoever you do, you cannot just go now. We have gone to the moon only. It will take at least twenty centuries to go to another solar system; to go beyond the family of this sun, it will take at least twenty centuries. It is a gradual process. Many things will have to be developed, only then. A bullock-cart will become an airplane, but many steps will have to be taken.
So you cannot do certain things in Buddha’s age as far as the outside world is concerned. But as far as the inside world is concerned, any moment, any moment, any time, is as good as any other, because when you move inside time disappears. This has to be understood.
A buddha is meditating, deeply gone inside. There is no time. Time ceases. He is not even aware of time. Time stops. If you move inside, time will stop. Buddha meditating twenty-five centuries ago will drop out of time; you meditating just today, you will also drop out of time. And there will be no difference between you and Buddha, because all differences are time differences.
You wear certain clothes Buddha cannot wear, you know many things Buddha cannot know. You belong to a different world, different education, different culture; Buddha belongs to a different world. But when you move in, you move outside culture, you move outside society, you move outside education. When you go in, you go into a different world uncreated by the society. Any day you can move.
And this is a human tendency, to think that “Our own age is bad, evil. Our own time is bad.” This is a human tendency. And this is not only so with us: this has always been so. The most ancient record has been found in Babylon. It is at least seven thousand years old. And if you publish it in any of tomorrow morning’s daily newspapers as an editorial, it will do. You need not change anything in it.
It says: This is the age of darkness. This is the age of corruption. This is the age of immorality and sin. Everything good has disappeared, everything wise has disappeared. Youth has become rebellious. The wife will not listen to her husband, the son will not listen to his father. The teachers are no longer respected by their disciples. This is a seven-thousand-year-old document!
Every age thinks that this is the worst one. Why? Because we are only aware of our own age and everything around, and we begin to compare our neighbor with Buddha. You don’t know that the neighbors were always just like these ones. Buddha was not your neighbor; Buddha is one in millions. So we compare the best one of the past with the worst one of the present. That’s the problem. That’s why every age appears to be the age of sin.
We think of Jesus, we don’t think of Judas. We think of Rama, we don’t think of Ravana. We think of Buddha, we don’t think of Devadatta. He was Buddha’s cousin-brother and he tried many times to murder Buddha. He was jealous, simply jealous that “Why should this man be honored and respected so much?” He was just a cousin-brother to him, nothing more.
When he felt that this would not do, he renounced the world. Devadatta renounced the world because “It seems that people honor only that one who has renounced the world.” So he renounced the world, he went into deep austerity. He practiced meditation, yoga, everything, just to get higher than Gautama.
That also won’t do, because you cannot force yourself to be a buddha, you cannot imitate. But Devadatta is forgotten, Buddha remains. The whole age is forgotten, only Buddha remains. Everything has disappeared, only Buddha remains. And then we compare Buddha with our whole age. Because of that this problem arises: whether Buddha or Jesus can be born today. It looks impossible. How is it possible? In this age of darkness, corruption, immorality, how is this possible?
Another factor also enters in. Whenever a person is dead for twenty centuries, we forget how we behaved with him when he was alive. Jesus was crucified, not because he was a great teacher or a great enlightened one, but only because he was immoral, undisciplined, against the code and against the tradition. His behavior was not that of a respectable man.
And when he was killed, it was a unanimous resolution. Few, very few, were with him, and the whole country was against him. He had only twelve disciples, and they too left. When the moment came and he was to be crucified, they all left. They also were doubtful inside: “When everyone is against him, something must be wrong.”
Jesus was crucified as a hippie, as a vagabond. You may be surprised: he was crucified but there is no record. Jews have not even recorded the incident. It was such a minor incident that no Jew has recorded it in their history. Romans have not recorded it. If you go to find any historical record that Jesus existed, you cannot find one. There is nothing. The Bible recorded by his disciples is the only record.
So there have been certain persons who have doubted the very existence of Jesus. They say he never existed. They say, rather, “This Jesus Christ was a drama which was played in every village. There was only a drama, not a real historical fact.” And later on, by and by, people forgot that this was a drama and it became history.
Because there is no record! – if the Bible is lost, there is no record that Jesus ever existed. If he was a very significant, prominent person, if the age was influenced by him, then this is impossible to conceive why there is no record. He was not. He was unknown, no one knew about him. Later on only, when disciples gathered and created an organization, by and by he became known. Otherwise he was an unknown carpenter’s son.
If Jesus meets you, you will not recognize him. If Buddha meets you somewhere suddenly, and no one introduces you to him, you will not recognize him. Because this inner flowering is such a subtle, such a hidden force, that unless you are also a fellow traveler, unless you are also moving in that dimension, you cannot recognize him.
So when you ask whether it is possible now, in this age, for a Buddha to be or for a Christ to be, you again ask a meaningless question. Any day, in any time, Christ is possible, Buddha is possible, because the possibility belongs to the innermost realm of your being, not to the procession of events which we call history. It doesn’t belong to history, it doesn’t belong to time. It belongs to the innermost realm of being which is eternity, not time. You can be a buddha – take the jump and you will be. And time will not hinder you so that you cannot take the jump.
This factor, that time is irrelevant, must be deeply understood and pondered over, because we are very cunning and very self-deceiving. If someone says that in this age it is not possible…and there are religions, and in a way every religion says it, that in this age this is not possible. Any organized religion will say this, that “Jesus was born once. He is the only begotten Son of God, and now you cannot be a Jesus again. You can only be a Christian, not a Christ.”
Jainas say, “You cannot be a tirthankara, you cannot be a Mahavira. The quota is finished. Only twenty-four persons can be tirthankaras. There can be no twenty-fifth.” Mohammedans will not allow you to be a prophet, a paigambara, because “Mohammed is the last paigambara, and he has brought the complete and the final message from God. No alteration is possible now, and there is no need.” Every organized religion will tell you that “Now you need not bother to be a Mohammed or a Mahavira. Just follow Mohammed or Mahavira. You can only be a follower.”
Why? Why do they say this? For two reasons. You like it very much, deep down: then the responsibility is not upon you. “The time is bad. If you are not a Jesus, it is not your responsibility. In this kaliyuga, in this age of sin, no one can be a Christ, so you are not. It is not your responsibility. It is the very time which hinders you; otherwise you would flower as a Jesus at any moment. You are ready, but the time is not helpful.”
Everyone likes this deep down, appreciates it. Then you can be whatsoever you are. There is no burden on you to flower into a buddha. Because of this deep satisfaction and deep cunningness, deception, we are happy. “We can only be criminals, we can only be weak human beings. That’s what the age allows.”
And, secondly, every religion thinks that if buddhas are going to be born again and again, then you cannot have an organized church for Buddha, because every other buddha will disturb the whole thing. Christians cannot allow anyone to be a christ again, because then he will disturb the whole Christian kingdom, because such persons are bound to be nontraditional, such persons are bound to be nonsectarian, such persons are bound to be absolutely free, independent. They will destroy any organization if they are born.
So no religion would like and appreciate Jesus to be there again, in any form. “The pope is the representative and he is enough. Jesus is no longer needed.” So every religion goes on insisting that nothing can be done at this moment. “What can be done is you have to follow – worship and follow. Just be a follower in the crowd. Don’t try to be an individual.”
Buddha was an individual, he was not a Buddhist. He was born a Hindu, and then the organization couldn’t contain him. No organization can contain such a person. See: Jesus was born a Jew, he died a Jew. He was not a Christian. But because the Jews could not contain such a seed, he could not be contained. They threw him out. Because he was thrown, the seed sprouted into Christianity.
Buddha was a Hindu. He lived as a Hindu, he died Hindu. He was not a Buddhist. But Hindus couldn’t absorb him, because if you want to absorb a buddha you will have to transform the whole society. He couldn’t be absorbed, he was thrown out.
If a buddha is born now into a Buddhist society, he will be thrown out. If a Jesus is born now in a Christian society, he will be thrown out. Because it is not that Jews or Hindus are against buddhas and christs: any organization will be against them, even their own organization, because organization lives in traditions, exists because of tradition, and these persons are absolutely anti-traditional, traditionless. They move every moment in freedom. You cannot say what they will do.
That’s why it is very difficult to create a sect with a living enlightened person. It is very difficult. You are never at ease: “What is he going to do? What is he going to say?” When the teacher is dead, a sect can be created. Now you know what the teacher wants, how he behaves. Now you can categorize everything. Now you can separate, divide, analyze. Now you can make a doctrine and principles out of it. Now the creed is possible.
Only a dead teacher will allow a creed to be there. With a living teacher, he is every day growing, changing, transforming, moving into the unknown. You are never certain with him, you are never certain. So only with dead teachers are creeds born. And when creeds are born, you begin to think in high terms of Jesus and Buddha. They were never thought of so highly in their own day.
So remember these two things. Religion is a continuous process; it never stops in any age. Spirituality is an individual phenomenon. If you decide for it, it will happen to you; no one can bar it, but it needs a total decision. And buddhas and christs are not bound to any age. At this very moment there are persons who are enlightened, but you cannot recognize them. It will take hundreds of years for the society to recognize them. When they are long dead then society will come to feel that they were rare, that something unique had happened in the past.
I will tell you a story. Nietzsche has written one of the most wonderful books in the world, Thus Spake Zarathustra. In this book he has given a parable:

A madman comes to the market and asks everyone, stares in everyone’s eyes and asks, “Have you seen God? Where is God? I am searching, I am seeking. Where is God?”
Everyone laughs. Of course, they are all believers, but, as believers are, it is a formality with them. They think that this man has gone mad. “Of course, there is God and he created the world. Now he is finished with us and we are finished with him. Why are you seeking? For what purpose? Are you insane? These things are good to talk and write about – that God is, seek him – but are you really seeking him?”
And that man stares in everyone’s eyes and he says, “Have you heard anything about God? Where is he?”
Then the whole crowd gathers around him and they tell him, “We have not heard about him since long. You go somewhere else. Don’t disturb the market.”
The man says, “I have come to deliver some news to you. I am not seeking him; I have come only to know whether you have heard anything lately about him. Do you know he is dead?”
Now they feel certainly he is mad. “He was mad when he was seeking – he is still mad if he says God is dead. We believe in a dead, alive God – dead so that he may not touch us and alive so that we can worship him on Sundays. But this man is mad. Either he thinks God is so alive that he can be found, or he thinks he is dead.” So they ask, “Who has told you?”
He says, “I have seen it for myself. And the more mysterious thing is this, that you have killed him. But it seems that the news has not yet reached you. It will take time. You yourselves have killed him. He is dead. But it seems the time is not yet ripe and I have come early. The news has not yet reached the marketplace – and you have killed him! So I must go back to the hills. The time is not ripe and I have come early. The news will take time to reach you.”
Even sunrays take time, the stars’ rays take time to reach you. There is thunder and lightning in the clouds. It takes time to reach you even when you have seen it, because there is a gap. Light travels faster than sound. When there is thunder and lightning in the clouds, you have seen the lightning, but you will hear the thunder later on.
So the madman says, “He is dead, and you have killed him, but it seems the news has not reached you yet. It will take time.”

It takes time. To recognize that a buddha is a buddha, it takes time. And it takes so much time that when Buddha is no more you recognize him, when a Jesus is no more you recognize him. And when he is, you not only do not recognize him: if someone says that he is, you will deny it. It takes time. This is one of the most unfortunate tendencies of the human mind, because because of this we miss much.
There are stories…. People would come to ask Buddha, “Someone says that you are an enlightened one. Are you? Really? Have you attained that unattainable?”
If the Buddha says, “Yes, I have attained,” they will go and say that he is an egoist. If he says, “I have not attained,” they will say, “We knew it already.” If he remains silent, they will say he knows nothing.
Hundreds and hundreds of stories… Pilate asks Jesus, “Really, you think that you are the Son of God? Really, you think so?” If Jesus says, “Yes, I am the Son of God,” he is a madman. If he remains silent, he is afraid. If he denies, then they think, “We knew it already that you were not.” So what can a Buddha say? What can a Jesus say?
But if he has been dead for twenty or twenty-five centuries you cannot go to him and ask, “Are you an enlightened one? Really? Don’t you think you are deceived by yourself? Are you not in some self-deception?” You cannot ask. And this long gap…over this long gap you cannot reach him. You begin to recognize it, but then it is useless. Then it is useless, because that recognition will not help. And if Buddha comes amidst you, you will again raise the same questions.
Why is this so? When someone is present amidst you, he looks just like you. He lives like you, he eats like you, he falls ill like you, he dies like you. How can you think that “a person just like me is enlightened and I am not”? It is humiliating. It is deep down hurtful to the ego. Because it hurts the ego, because you feel humiliation, you deny. When you deny, you feel good.
So I will say to you that whenever you are in contact with someone where you begin to feel the tendency of the mind to deny, remember this: because of this tendency you have missed many buddhas, and because of this tendency you will never be able to recognize. And unless you recognize something which has happened in someone, it is not going to happen in you, because when you go on denying that anyone is a buddha, ultimately you will come to believe that you cannot become one yourself. When no one can become, when no one is, how can you become?
When you recognize buddhahood in someone, deep down you have recognized your own buddhahood in the future. To recognize a buddha in the present is to recognize your own future, your own future possibility, your own destiny.

============================================================

Nischalatwam pradakshinam.

Stillness is pradakshina – the movement around That for worship.
Silence is meditation, and silence is basic for any religious experience. What is silence? You can create it, you can cultivate it, you can force it, but then it is just superficial, false, pseudo. You can practice it, and you will begin to feel and experience it, but your practice makes it auto-hypnotic. It is not real silence. Real silence comes only when your mind dissolves, not through any effort but through understanding, not through any practice but through an inner awareness.
We are filled with sounds, outside and inside. In the outside world it is impossible to create a situation which is silent. Even when we move to a forest, deep in a forest, it is not silence – only new sounds, natural sounds. In the middle of the night everything has stopped, but it is not silence, only new sounds you are not acquainted with – more harmonious, of course, more musical, but still sounds, no silence.
A modern musician and composer, John Cage, has said many times that silence is impossible. You can have musical sounds, you can have nonmusical sounds; you can have sounds you like and sounds you don’t like. When you don’t like sounds, they become noise; when you like noise, it becomes music. But you cannot have silence – Cage says you cannot have silence.
He reports one incident. He thought previously, before this incident, that silence is a possibility, but he had not meditated over it. Once he entered a hall in Harvard University built particularly for some scientific engineering purposes. The hall was absolutely soundproof and anti-echo, absolutely. He entered the hall. He has an ear for sound, he is a great musician, one of the greatest of this century. In that hall he began to hear two sounds: one a high sound, the other a low sound.
He asked the engineer-in-charge, “You say this hall is absolutely soundproof, you say it is anti-echo, but I hear two sounds: one high and one low.”
The engineer said, “The high sound is your nervous system working and the low sound is your blood in circulation.”
Cage says, “That day I became absolutely certain that, unless I die, silence is impossible.”
Silence is impossible in the outside world. And your nervous system is part of the outside world, not of the inside. And your blood circulation is part of the outside world, not of the inside. The real inside is absolutely silent. If you allow me I will say: the absolute point of silence is the inside.
Sound is outside, silence is inside. Silence and inside are synonymous. If you move out, then you move in sound. If you move in, then you move in silence. And unless you reach a point where no sound is…or, as the Zen masters say, the soundless sound, or as the Hindu yogis have always called it, anahat nada, the uncreated, soundless sound. But one need not use these paradoxical words. It will be easy to understand with simple words. Outside is sound, inside is silence, soundlessness.
But Cage is right. If you are thinking in terms of objective silence, there is no possibility. There is no possibility if you are thinking of silence somewhere other than your inner center – then there is no possibility. But you can create a pseudo silence very easily. You can cultivate it, you can practice it.
For example, you can use any mantra. Constant repetition will give you a pseudo-feeling of silence, a false feeling of silence. Constant repetition of a mantra hypnotizes you. You begin to feel dull, your awareness is lost, you become more and more sleepy. And in that sleepiness you can feel that you have become silent. It is not silence. Silence means: mind dissolved through understanding. The more you understand your mind, the more you become aware about its mechanism and working, the more you are disidentified from your mind. It is identification which creates inner noise.
Anger is there in the mind: you are identified with it. You don’t see it as an object, anger there, somewhere outside you. You begin to feel angry, you begin to become one with it. Then you will miss your inner center, you have moved. Many thoughts are flowing in the mind continuously; the thought process is on. You are identified with each and every thought. Any thought is yours; you become one with it. Then you have moved.
Not only with thoughts do you become one but also with things still further from your center. Your house is not only your house: you have become your house. Your possessions are not just your possessions: you are identified with them. When your car is damaged, your inside is also damaged. When your house is on fire, you are also on fire. If all of your possessions are just taken away, you will die.
We are identified with our possessions, we are identified with our thoughts, we are identified with our emotions, we are identified with everything, except ourselves. Except the innermost center, we are identified with everything. Because of this identification, noise is created, conflict, a continuous anguish, tension.
It is bound to be there because you are not your house. There is a gap and you have forgotten the gap. You are not your wife, you are not your husband. There is a gap – you have forgotten the gap. You are not your thoughts, your anger, or your love, or your hatred. There is a gap. When you begin to feel this gap, you are always out, a witness, not involved in. Anything you are not involved in, you are outside it.
If John Cage, as he reports, heard his own sounds – the nervous system working, the blood circulating – then two things are there. The awareness, the knowledge, the knowing, the consciousness, and a point is there inside which becomes aware that two sounds are there. But Cage is aware only of two sounds. He is not aware of the center which is aware of these two sounds.
If he becomes aware of this center of alertness, then those two sounds are just far away. There is a gap. And the moment your focus of consciousness is transferred from objective sounds to the soundless center of awareness, you are in silence. So I would like to say: you are silence, and everything else except you is sound. If you are identified with anything, then you will never attain this soundlessness.
This sutra says:
Silence, stillness is pradakshina – the movement around That for worship.
You go to a temple and then you move around the altar of the deity seven times. This is a ritual of worship, but every ritual is symbolic. Why seven rounds? Man has seven bodies, and with each body there are identifications. So when someone moves in, he has to leave seven bodies and the identifications with each body. There are seven rounds; when these seven rounds are complete, you are in the center.
The altar in the temple is not something outside you. You are the temple and the altar is your inner center. If your mind moves around your center, comes nearer and nearer and nearer and, ultimately, is established in the center, this is pradakshina. And when you happen to be at your center, everything is silent.
This silence is achieved through understanding: understanding your anger, your passion, your greed, your sex, everything – understanding your mind. But we are identified with our minds. We think we are our minds. That is the only problem: how to be detached from our own minds, how to be divorced, so to speak, from our own minds. I am reminded:

Mulla Nasruddin applied for a divorce. The whole village gathered in the court. Everyone was just surprised, because Mulla Nasruddin was eighty-seven and his wife seventy-eight. The judge was also surprised. He said, “Nasruddin, what is your age?”
Nasruddin said, “My age is just eighty-seven.” Just eighty-seven!
“And what is the age of your wife?”
He said, “Just seventy-eight.”
“And how long have you been married and how long have you lived together, Nasruddin?”
Nasruddin said, “My lord, not more than sixty-five years – only sixty-five years!”
The magistrate said, “I am surprised. When you have lived for sixty-five years continuously together, what is the reason to apply for a divorce now?”
Mulla Nasruddin said, “My lord, enough is enough!”
With our mind also a point must be reached when you can say, “Enough is enough.” We have lived with our minds for lives together, for millennia, but still the point has not been reached when we can say enough is enough. We are still not aware that our whole misery, the whole hell that we call life, is because of our mind and the identification with it.
There is no need to leave the world. The only religious requirement is to leave the mind, because the mind is the world. Sometimes we get bored, frustrated, fed up – not with mind, but with a particular mind. Then we change it, but the change is not for no-mind. The change is again for another mind.
And that very thing happened with Mulla Nasruddin. His divorce was allowed, it was granted, and he was thinking, “When I am freed from my wife I will be free at last, and then I can sleep at ease.” But he couldn’t sleep that night at all. He was so excited – not that the divorce was such an excitement, but the moment the divorce was allowed he began to think of marrying again.
This is how we go on. He was fed up with this wife, but not fed up with being a husband, not fed up with woman. He was fed up with this woman, not fed up with the mind which creates all these relationships and suffers. And within a week, the rumor was afoot that he was going to marry a girl of seventeen. Everyone became disturbed, the whole village. He had sons, a sixty-five-year-old, grandchildren and children of grandchildren.
His eldest son, who was sixty-five, approached him and said, “Dad, it doesn’t look good to advise you, but to marry a seventeen-year-old girl at the age of eighty-seven, it is just absurd. And the whole village is against it. And, moreover, it is not good for health. It may even prove fatal to life.”
Nasruddin said, “You don’t bother about it. If this girl dies, I will marry again!”

This is how mind goes on working. It is always changing things outside, somewhere else on the periphery, never changing itself.
Our mind is the problem, and the mind is always looking outside, never in. A divorce is needed – not with a particular mind, not with this or that mind, but with mind itself. With minding itself a divorce is needed, and only then do you enter silence.
So what is to be done? You can do two things. One is very ordinary and is done everywhere, that is: don’t try to change this mind but use some technique to drug this mind as it is. Use some technique to drug this mind as it is. No transformation is needed. A mantra is given to you, a method, a certain technique. You do it – with this very mind.
You are capable of dulling it and drugging it; then it will be less active on the surface, but it will be more active in the deeper realms. It may become absolutely inactive on the surface, and you may be befooled by it, but the activity will continue inside. Use a mantra, go on repeating Rama-Rama, Krishna, or any name, and then the surface mind will become silent. But you can feel inside activity. Just below the surface mind much activity is going on. Thinking continues in subdued terms, in subdued tones. Everything continues – it just goes underground.
This is very easy. That’s why mantra yoga is a very prevalent thing. It has appeal. Mahesh Yogi’s transcendental meditation is just this sort of self-deception. It is just a trick; you can play it. It will help in the beginning, and for a few days you will feel very much edified, elevated. And then everything stops. A plateau is reached. When the surface has become a little bit silent, then you cannot do anything with this technique. And then, by and by, the subdued notes will become again clear.
This is simple autohypnosis. Even if you continue to think, “I am silent, I am silent, I am getting more silent every day,” you will begin to feel a certain silence, but that feeling is just thought-created. Stop thinking and it will evaporate. Coué’s method or suchlike: just go on thinking repetitively, continuously, that you are silent, you are silent inside, you are getting day by day more and more silent. Go on continuously repeating this. Constant repetition will befool you. You will begin to think that, of course, now you are silent. This is self-deception and it leads nowhere. You remain the same. There is no transformation.
This sutra is not concerned with such stillnesses. This sutra is concerned with the authentic silence, which comes not through techniques but through understanding. And what do I mean by understanding? Don’t fight with your mind. Try to understand it. Anger is there: don’t be angry against anger, don’t fight the anger. Rather, try to understand what anger is: “What is this energy? Why does this come? What is the cause of it and what is the origin of it and where is the source?” Meditate on anger. And the more you become aware of it, the less and less anger will come to you. And when there is no anger, you are thrown into your inner silence.
Sex is there. Don’t fight it: try to understand it. We are fighting with ourselves. Either we are identified with the mind or we are fighting with the mind. And in both the cases we are the losers. If you are identified, then you will indulge – in anger, in sex, in greed, in jealousy. If you are fighting, then you will create anti attitudes, then you will create inner divisions, then you will create inner polarities. And you are divided, no one else, because the anger is your anger.
Now if you are fighting it you have double the anger: anger and this angriness against the anger. And you are divided. Now you can go on fighting, but this fight is just absurd. It is as if I am trying to fight my right hand with my left hand. I can go on fighting. Sometimes my right hand will win, sometimes my left hand may win, but there is no victory. You can play the game, but there is neither defeat nor victory.

I have heard a story about D. T. Suzuki. He was a guest in a certain family. Suzuki was a great thinker; he introduced Zen to the West. He was himself deep in meditation. He was staying with a certain family, and because of him the family had invited many guests to meet him. They discussed many, many philosophical problems. The discussion was prolonged up until midnight. It was a long, three, four, five-hour discussion. Everything was discussed – without any conclusion, as it happens always in philosophical discussions.
When the guests had left, the host asked Suzuki, “It was a long discussion and we enjoyed it, but there was no conclusion. It is frustrating.”
Suzuki laughed and said, “I like philosophy because of this, because you can go on fighting. There is no victory, no defeat. This is a very refined game, in which no one is defeated and no one ever wins. This is not a vulgar game in which someone wins and someone is defeated. This is such a game that you go on playing it – no one ever wins and no one is ever defeated. And the beauty, moreover, is this: that everyone thinks that he has won. This is the beauty of it – it is so.”

The same happens inside also if you begin to fight with yourself, because you are fighting from both the sides. No victory is possible because there is no one except you. You are playing with yourself, dividing yourself.
This fight, inner fight, is the curse of all religious persons, because the moment they become aware of the hell their mind has created, they begin to fight it. But through fight you will never move anywhere. Many reasons are there.
When you fight with your mind, you have to remain with it. And when you fight with your mind, it shows ignorance – because the mind is there only because you have a deep cooperation with it. If the cooperation is withdrawn, the mind dissolves. Then there is no need to fight. The mind is not your enemy; it is just the accumulation of your own experiences. It is your mind because you have accumulated it, and you cannot fight with your experiences. If you do, then the greater possibility is this: that your experiences may win. They are more weighty than you. This happens every day. If you fight with your mind, your mind wins in the end – not ultimately, but it wins and you have to yield.
Real, authentic stillness is not achieved through fight. Fight is suppressive, repressive. And whatsoever is repressed has to be repressed again and again. And whatsoever is repressed will try to rebel against you. You will become a madhouse – fighting with yourself, talking with yourself, taking revenge upon yourself, yielding to yourself, being defeated by yourself. You will become a madhouse.
Don’t be in a fight with the mind. And this fight will create such noise that even ordinary persons are not so filled with inner noise as religious persons are. Ordinary persons are not even bothered. They go on, they take it easy. They know it is a hell, but they accept it. A religious person knows it is a hell, denies it, fights with it – a double hell is created.
You cannot create heaven by fighting hell. If you want to transcend, fight is not the way. Awareness, knowing what this mind is, is the way. So what is to be done? Be aware of suppressive methods. Only one thing is essential, that whatsoever you are doing, do it with full awareness. If you are angry, then be angry with awareness.
Gurdjieff used to speak and create situations. For his disciples he would create situations. You have just come into the room and Gurdjieff will create a situation in which you are insulted. Someone says something very abusive about you, someone else says something else…you begin to get angry. And the whole group will help you to get angry, and you are unaware of what is happening. Gurdjieff will push you into more and more anger, and then suddenly you will burst, you will explode, you will be mad.
And then Gurdjieff will say, “Now be angry with full awareness. Don’t go back, don’t fall back – be angry!” Then it is not easy to fall back. And he will say, “Now be alert inside and see what is happening in you. Close your eyes and see what is happening. From where have these clouds of anger come? From where is this smoke coming? Find the inner fire inside from where this smoke is coming.”
Gurdjieff was always creating situations. He was of the opinion that if we want a more silent world, we must teach our children how to be angry, how to be jealous, how to be filled with hate, how to be violent. We must teach them. We are doing quite the opposite: we say, “Don’t be angry.” No one says what anger is. No one teaches that if you are going to be angry, then be angry in a tactful way, then be angry efficiently, then be a master of anger. No one is teaching this; everyone is against anger and everyone is saying, “Don’t be angry!” The child is even unaware of what anger is, but we tell him, “Don’t be angry,” and we go on making commandments: “Don’t be this, don’t do that!”

A child was asked what his name was. He said, “‘Don’t,’ because whenever I do anything, either my mother or my father cries, ‘Don’t!’ So I think this is my name. I am always called Don’t.”

This creates a fighting attitude. Without knowledge, you are against certain things. And if you are ignorant you cannot win, because knowledge is power. Not only scientifically in the outside world, but inwardly also knowledge is power.
There is electricity in the clouds. It has always been there, but we were ignorant. Electricity in the clouds used to create only fear in us and nothing else. Now we know about it, now the electricity has become our slave. There is no fear. Otherwise, the Vedas say that when God is angry with you, he will send thunder, he will send storms, lightning – when he is angry with you. That was “God’s anger.” Now we have channeled it. Now it is no more “God’s anger”; it is no more at all related with God. We are manipulating it. Knowledge becomes power.
Anger inside is also just like electricity, lightning. Previously it was “God’s anger,” the lightning in the clouds. Then we came to know about it. Knowledge became power. Now there is no “God’s anger” in the clouds. Your anger is again an electricity, inner. The moment you know about it, there will be no anger inside you. And then you can channel your anger – it becomes your servant.
A person who has no anger, really, will be impotent. Anger is energy. If you don’t know about it, it becomes suicidal. If you know about it, you can transform the energy. You can use it. Then it is just your slave.
And the same goes for everything. Your thoughts: they are energy, they can be used. If you can become silent, you become the master of your thoughts. Right now you have thoughts but no thinking, many thoughts and no thinking. When you have no thoughts you have become the master of your process of thinking, you can think for the first time. Thinking is energy, but then you are the master.
With the discovery of the inner stillpoint, you become the master. Without that discovery, you will remain a slave to your instincts, to anything. Knowledge will lead you in, so make yourself a laboratory. You are a universe. Find out what your energies are – not your enemies – what are your energies?
Choose the chief characteristic. Remember this: choose the chief characteristic. Is anger your chief characteristic, or sex, or greed, or jealousy, or hate? What is your chief characteristic? Find out first, because if you go on without knowing the chief characteristic, it will be a difficult process to go in – because the chief characteristic has your energy in it. It is the central thing. Everything else is just secondary to it, subsidiary to it.
If your anger is the chief characteristic, then all else will be just a support to it. Find out the center of your energies, and then begin to be aware about it. Then forget everything else. If greed is your chief characteristic, then be aware of greed and forget everything else. When greed is solved, everything else will be solved. And remember this: don’t imitate anyone else because their chief characteristic may be a different thing.
Because of this imitative tendency, we create unnecessary problems. For example, Buddha had one thing to transform, Mahavira had another thing, Jesus something else. If you blindly follow Jesus, then you will begin to fight with the chief characteristic of Jesus, not your own, and that will misguide you. If you blindly follow Buddha, then again you are misguided. Understand Buddha, understand Jesus, but find out your disease, and concentrate your awareness on that particular disease. If the main disease is solved, minor diseases will dissolve by themselves.
We go on fighting with minor diseases. Then you can waste lives together. You change one minor disease and another minor disease will be created, because the source of energy, the central source of your disease, remains intact. So if you are working with minor diseases you can only change a disease. We are even afraid to find out what our chief disease is.
Many many persons come to me, and I am surprised, always surprised, that whatsoever they say is their problem is never the case. They even deceive about their problems. When I work with them, when I observe them, and when they become more frank, more naked, then new problems arise.
One man was here, an older man, fifty-eight, fifty-nine. He would always come and talk about meditation and how to do it. He said, “I have been interested in meditation continuously for twenty-five years. That is my only interest.” But that was not the case at all. Meditation was not his interest at all.
By and by, it became apparent to him also that he was not interested in meditation. He was interested in a reputation that he is a great meditator. Reputation was his interest, ego was the problem. And he would always say, “Ego is not my problem. I am a humble man. But too many thoughts is my problem, so how to dissolve these thoughts?”
The chief characteristic was only one thought – the thought of ego was the problem. And he was always avoiding the chief disease.
So you can go on cutting the leaves of a tree, and the tree will again put out new leaves. You cut one and the tree will supply two, and the tree will be greener for your effort, more green for your effort. You cannot cut leaves, you can only cut roots. And leaves and roots are different things. When I say “the chief characteristic” I mean the root. When I say “minor problems” I mean leaves. And the problem becomes more difficult to solve because leaves are apparent and roots are underground. They are the source of all the leaves. You cut the whole tree, and a new tree will come out because the roots are intact. You cut the roots, and the tree will disappear automatically. Then there is no need to be bothered with the tree.
But roots are underground. Your chief characteristic will always be found underground. So whatsoever you say is your problem is never the case. It can be taken for granted that that is not the case. Rather, quite the opposite may be the case, because we go on hiding our inner weaknesses. And just to distract the mind, just to forget the problem, we create minor problems.

One day a man came to Mulla Nasruddin. He was the old man in the village – wise in everything, wise in all worldly ways. The man had been suffering from a cold for a long time. He was very ill and he had tried every medicine, but to no avail. So he asked the Mulla his advice, what to do.
Mulla said, “You go to the lake at midnight.” The night was ice cold and the lake was just freezing. “You take a bath, then be naked and run around the lake.”
Winds were blowing fast. The man said. “What are you suggesting? I am suffering from a cold. I may get even more ill, – I may get pneumonia!”
Mulla Nasruddin said, “If you can get pneumonia, I have the medicine for you. But for a common cold there is no medicine. If you get pneumonia, then I can help you.”

In our inner world, we go on avoiding problems which we cannot solve. We try to forget problems which we cannot solve, and we begin to focus our mind on problems which we can solve. Because of that, your chief diseases go underground. Ultimately, you are not even aware of them, and you go on fighting with phony problems which are not real problems. These phony problems take much energy and dissipate your energies, destroy them, and you remain the same because you go on fighting with the leaves.
So the first thing toward inner stillness is to find out what the root of your problems, of your conflicts, of your tensions, is – what is the root? Don’t think how to solve it, because if you think of solving you will be scared. Don’t think of solving it. First simply find out: “What is the chief characteristic of my mind? What is the center of my mind?” No question about solving it, no idea about changing it, a simple inventory: “What is the chief problem to my mind?”
Don’t go on escaping from the chief characteristic, and don’t create phony problems. They will not help. Even if you solve them, they will not help. Once you know the chief characteristic of your mind, now be aware of it: how it works, how it creates inner nets, how it goes on working inside and influencing your whole life. Just be aware. Still don’t think how to change it, because the moment you begin to think of how to change it you miss the opportunity of being aware.
Anger is there, greed is there, sex is there: don’t think of changing, don’t think of transcending them. They are there: be aware. Transcendence is not a result, it is a consequence. Remember this difference. The difference is subtle. Transcendence is not a result, it is a consequence. What do I mean? You cannot think of transcendence. You cannot think, “How to go beyond mind?” You will never go. If I say, “Be aware,” I don’t mean that by awareness you can go beyond mind.
Someone was here just the other day. He is struggling to be in meditation, to be silent. But he is in such a hurry that that hurry becomes the obstacle. Whenever he comes he asks, “How many days more will it take? I have been doing meditation for three months, and yet nothing has happened.”
So I told him, “Unless you leave this constant hankering – when will it happen? – it is not going to happen at all.”
The man said to me, “I can leave it. I will not hanker after the result. But tell me, if I leave this, when will it happen? I can leave this – even this I can leave. I will not bother you again. But tell me, if I leave this, when will it happen?”
So if I say, “By awareness you will transcend,” don’t think that awareness is a method, and because you want to transcend, of course, “If awareness is the method, then I am going to practice it because through it I will transcend.” You will never transcend. If awareness is attained, transcendence happens. That is a consequence, not a result. It comes. If awareness is there, transcendence will come. You will go beyond your mind, you will reach the inner center of stillness. But you cannot desire it.
That’s what I mean when I say it is not a result. A result can be desired, but a consequence follows. It cannot be desired. A result can be manipulated, planned, but a consequence cannot be manipulated, cannot be planned. If you are really aware, you will transcend. Awareness is not a method of transcendence, awareness is transcendence.
This constant awareness of your mind dissolves, by and by, your greed, your anger, your sex, your hate, your jealousy. They dissolve automatically. There is no effort to dissolve them, not even any intention to dissolve them, not any longing to dissolve them. They are there, so rather than the intention to dissolve them, acceptance is more helpful.
Accept your anger – it is there. Accept it and be aware of it. These are two things: acceptance and awareness. And you can be aware only if you accept totally. If you don’t accept me, you cannot look at my face. If you don’t accept me, you will try to avoid me in subtle ways. Even if I am present in the room, you will look in some other direction, you will think of something else. If you don’t accept me, if you reject me, your whole mind will try to avoid me. If you reject anger, you cannot be aware. You cannot encounter it face-to-face. And when anger is encountered face-to-face, it dissolves. When sex is encountered face-to-face, the energy is released into a different dimension. Encounter your mind and accept it.
The negative teachings, the condemnatory teachings, teachings which are based on struggle, have created this, our so-called world. The whole earth is a madhouse, and everyone is just on the verge of being mad.
Now psychologists say there are two types of madness: one, normal madness; the other, abnormal madness. Normal madness means everyone is like that. Abnormal madness: you have gone a little further. There is no difference really of quality, it seems the difference is only quantitative, only of degrees. And when you are angry, really, you are temporarily mad. You have gone from the average madness to the abnormal madness. When one is filled with passion, mad passion, he is not the average, normal man. He is a different man altogether. And in a twenty-four-hour day, many times you touch the abnormal madness.
That’s why when someone commits a murder we begin to think, “That man was not such a man. We knew him, but we knew him only in his average madness.” Someone commits a crime, and we cannot believe it: “That man was not such a man, but we knew him only in his average madness.”
The nonaverage, the abnormally mad, is always there. Any time the abnormally mad mind can get hold of you, any moment.
William James visited a madhouse, and for thirty-seven years afterwards he couldn’t sleep well, because in the madhouse for the first time he became aware that “Whatsoever has happened to others can happen to me any moment.”
He saw a madman who was beating his own head, beating his head against a wall. He came home; he couldn’t sleep that night. His wife was disturbed and she asked, “What happened?”
He said, “I am disturbed, very much disturbed. That which has happened to that man can happen to me also.”
His wife laughed and she said, “Why are you unnecessarily worrying? You are not going to be mad.”
William James said, “Only a few days ago that man was not mad either, and now he is mad. I am not mad now – tomorrow I can be. What is the guarantee?”
There is no guarantee, of course, because it is only a question of degrees. There is no guarantee. You may be just on the verge. Something happens and you are pushed. Your wife dies or your house burns down, or something, and you are pushed a degree ahead. This situation, this mad situation of humanity, is a byproduct of constant struggle with one’s own mind.
Sanity is always based on acceptance. This is the secret. If a madman can accept his madness totally, madness will disappear. Whatsoever you can accept totally, a new phenomenon happens inside with it. Through acceptance, conflict is dissolved. And the energy that was being dissipated in any conflict is not dissipated now. You become stronger. With this strength, and awareness, you go higher than your mind.
Acceptance of the mind and awareness of the mind – and the third thing: moving in this world, living in this world, not from the periphery but from the center.
Someone abuses you. He is saying something against your name. The man who lives from the periphery will think, “He is saying it against me.” The man who lives from the center will say, “He is speaking against the name, and I am not the name. I was born without any name. The name is just a label on the periphery, so why get disturbed? He is saying something, not against me but against the name.”
If you are identified with the name, then you are disturbed. If you can feel the gap between the name and you, between the periphery and you, then the periphery is hurt, but the hurt never reaches to the center.

One Hindu sannyasin, Swami Ramateertha, was in America. Someone abused him – he came laughing. He told his disciples, “Someone was abusing Rama very much. Rama was in a great difficulty; they were abusing him, and he was in a great difficulty.”
So the disciples asked, “About whom are you talking? Rama is your name.”
Ramateertha said, “Of course, it is my name – but not me. They don’t know me at all. How can they abuse me? They know only my name.”

Even if your action is abused, it is not you, only the action. If you can maintain a gap – and that’s not difficult; with awareness it is the most easy thing – if you can maintain a gap, then the periphery is touched but the center remains untouched. If the center remains untouched, sooner or later you are bound to discover the point of deep stillness, which is not only your point, but the point, the central point, of the whole existence.
I was reading a story just this morning. It is one of the most beautiful stories:

One young seeker, after a long and arduous journey, reached the hut of his master, the master of his choice. It was evening, and the master was just sweeping fallen leaves. The seeker greeted the master, but the master remained silent. He asked many questions, but there were no replies. He tried in every way to get the attention of the master, but the master was there as if he were alone. He went on sweeping the fallen leaves.
Seeing no possibility of getting the attention of the master, the disciple decided to make a hut in the same forest and to live there. He lived there for years. After a time the past dropped, because you have to go on creating something daily, you have to create your past again and again daily. But in the forest everything was silent. No man was there; only the master was there who was just like no man. No communication – he would not even reply to your greetings, he would not even look at you. His eyes were just vacant, an emptiness.
So after a time the past dissolved. The disciple continued to be there. Thoughts were there; then by and by they slowed, because you have to feed them daily. If you don’t feed them, they cannot continue forever. Nothing to do, he would relax, sit silently, sweep the fallen leaves.
After many years, one day when he was sweeping the fallen leaves, he became enlightened. He stopped everything. He ran to the master’s hut. He went there – the master was sweeping fallen leaves. The disciple said, “Thank you, sir.”
Of course, the master never replied. But this thank-you is beautiful. He went to the master and said, “Thank you, sir.” Because only because of this master not replying to him, not giving any intellectual answers, not even looking at him – he was so silent, the master was so silent – did he learn something from the master. He learned this silence. He learned this living in the center without being bothered by the periphery.
Someone is greedy. This is a peripheral matter; let him be greedy. Someone is asking something. This is a peripheral matter; let him ask. The master remained undisturbed. He went on sweeping his dead leaves. He didn’t say anything, but he showed a way. He didn’t reply, but he answered. He was the answer. Such a silence the disciple had never known. Such absent presence he had never witnessed. It was as if the man was not there at all – a nothingness, not a man; a nobodiness, not a man.
Without saying anything, the master had said much. Rather, he showed much, and the disciple followed. Only one lesson, but a very secret one: remain in the center and don’t be bothered by the periphery. For years together, he remained in the center, tried to remain in the center, not being bothered by the periphery. One day, sweeping the fallen dead leaves, he was awakened. Years had passed…but such gratefulness. He stopped everything and ran to the master and said, “Thank you, sir.”
Just by following a hidden answer! But it depends on you. Someone else in his place might have felt humiliated, insulted, might have felt this man was mad, might have got angry. Then he would have missed a great opportunity. But he was not negative, he took it very positively. He felt the meaning of it, he tried to live it, and the thing happened. It is a consequence, it is not a result. He could have imitated – this was not imitation. He never came again. He was in the same forest, but he never came again. Only twice: first he came to greet, and then to thank.
What was he doing for all these years? A simple lesson, one secret, but the most basic. He tried not to be bothered by the periphery. He accepted himself. Not bothering with the periphery, not being bothered by the periphery, he remained aware. He was so aware, really, that it was as if these twenty years were not there. And when the thing happened, when the happening was there, he ran as if nothing had happened within these twenty years. Twenty years before, the master had shown him a way, but it was as if these twenty years were not there. He reached the master to thank him – as if just a moment before he had shown him the way.

If silence is there, time disappears. Time is a peripheral matter. If silence is there, you become grateful to everything – to the sky, to the earth, to the sun, to the moon, to everything. If the silence is there, any moment the old world disappears. The old you is no more there, the old man is dead, and a new life, a new energy, is born.
This sutra says this is pradakshina. If you can enter into the center of your being, into this stillness, where there is no sound, only then have you entered the temple, have you worshiped the deity, have you encircled, have you done the ritual. We can go on in a temple continuously doing the ritual without ever being aware of what this ritual means. Every ritual is a secret key. Ritual in itself is childish. If you don’t know that a key is a key, you can play with it, you can even throw it away. And in the end you will come to think, “This is meaningless.” because you don’t know the lock. And you don’t know that this is a key and something can open with it.
These are secret languages, rituals are secret languages. Through them something has been communicated. Books can be destroyed, languages can become dead, the meanings of words go on changing. Because of this, whenever there has been an enlightened man he has created certain rituals. They are more permanent languages. When scriptures disappear, when religions become dead, when old languages cannot be understood, or can be misinterpreted, rituals continue. Sometimes a whole religion disappears, but the rituals go on. They become transplanted into new religions. They enter new religions without anyone being aware of what is happening.
Rituals are a permanent language, and whenever one goes deep in them the secrets are discovered. This Upanishad is basically concerned with the ritual of worship, and every act is meaningful. In itself it looks childish. It is stupid to go into a temple and make rounds around the altar or the image of the deity– it looks stupid. What are you doing? In itself it is. We have forgotten that the key is a key. Its meaning is in knowing the lock, its meaning is in opening the lock. These seven rounds around the altar are concerned with seven bodies, and the altar is concerned with the innermost center.
Move around your center, go on moving inwards, and a moment comes when every movement stops. There is no sound. You have entered silence. This silence is divine, this silence is bliss, this silence is the aim of all religions, and this silence is the purpose of all life. And unless you attain this silence, whatsoever you may attain is useless, meaningless. Even if you can attain the whole world, it is of no use.
If you attain this inner silence, this center, and you lose the whole world, even then it is worth attaining. No bargain is bad – even if everything is staked, sacrificed. When you achieve the inner silence, you know whatsoever you have paid for it was nothing. What you get is invaluable. What you lose for it was just rubbish.
But the rubbish to us is wealth, the rubbish is to us very valuable. And I will repeat again: if you think that you can purchase with this rubbish, then you will never be able to get to the center. The center cannot be a result. If you throw this rubbish, you attain to it – that’s a consequence.
Stillness is pradakshina – the movement around That for worship – around That – the inner center, the innermost center. This is the periphery, That is the center. So go on leaving this and go on moving towards That – this is all that sadhana consists of, this is the path.

============================================================

MOUNAM STUTIHI

"SILENCE IS THE PRAYER."

"SILENCE is the prayer." By prayer we always mean a communication, something said to the Divine, but the Upanishads say that whatsoever you may say will not be prayer. Prayer is not something to be done. You cannot do it. It is not an act; it is not your doing. So, really, you cannot "do" prayer, you can only be a prayer. It is not related with any of your doings. It is a certain state of your being.
So the first thing to be understood is that man has two dimensions in Existence: one is his being, the other is his doing. Prayer is not part of the second. You cannot do it, and the prayer that is done will be false, inauthentic. You can be: prayer belongs to the dimension of being.

The body cannot do prayer, cannot be in prayer. The mind cannot do prayer, cannot be in prayer. The body is meant to do something; it is the vehicle of action. The mind is also a vehicle of action. Thinking is doing: it is action. So you cannot do anything with your body which can become prayer, neither can you do anything with your mind which can be called prayer, because these are both parts of the dimension of doing, action. Prayer happens beyond body and mind. So if your body is in total inactivity, passive, and your mind is nullified, empty, only then is prayer possible.
This sutra says, "Silence is prayer." When mind is not working, when body is not active, it is silent. One thing to be understood is that silence is not part of mind. So whenever we say, "He has a silent mind," it is nonsense. A mind can never be silent. The very being of mind is anti-silence. Mind is sound, not silence. So when we say, "He has a silent mind," it is wrong. If he is really silent, then we must say that he has no mind.

A "silent mind" is a contradiction in terms. If mind is there. it cannot be silent; and if it is silent, it is no more. That is why Zen monks use the term "no-mind", never "silent mind". No-mind is silence! And the moment there is no-mind you cannot feel your body, because mind is the passage through which body is felt. If there is no-mind, you cannot feel that you are a body; body disappears from consciousness. So in prayer there is neither mind nor body -- only pure Existence. That pure Existence is indicated by silence -- mouna.

How to attain to this prayer, to this silence? How to be in this prayer, in this silence? Whatsoever you can do will be useless; that is the greatest problem. For a religious seeker this is the greatest problem, because whatsoever he can do will lead nowhere -- because doing is not relevant. You can sit in a particular posture: that is your doing. You must have seen Buddha's posture. You can sit in Buddha's posture: that will be a doing. For Buddha himself this posture happened. It was not a cause for his silence; rather, it was a by-product.

When the mind is not, when the being is totally silent, the body follows like a shadow. The body takes a particular posture -- the most relaxed possible, the most passive possible. But you cannot do otherwise. You cannot take a posture first and then make silence follow. Because we see a Buddha sitting in a particular posture, we think that if this posture is followed then the inner silence will follow. This is a wrong sequence. For Buddha the inner phenomenon happened first, and then this posture followed.

Look at it through your own experience: when you get angry, the body takes a particular posture, your eyes become blood-red, your face takes a particular expression. Anger is inside, and then the body follows. Not only outwardly: inwardly also, the whole chemistry of the body changes. Your blood runs fast, you breathe in a different way, you are ready to fight or take flight. But anger happens first, then the body follows.
Start from the other pole: make your eyes red, create fast breathing, do whatsoever you feel is done by the body when anger is there. You can act, but you cannot create anger inside. An actor is doing the same every moment. When he is acting a role of love, he is doing whatsoever is done by the body when love happens inside -- but there is no love. The actor may be doing better than you. but love will not follow. He will be more apparently angry than you in real anger, but it is just false. Nothing is happening inside.

Whenever you start from without, you will create a false state. The real always happens first in the center, and then the waves reach to the periphery. That is why this sutra says that prayer is silence. The innermost center is in prayer. Start from there.
But that is very difficult. The difficulty arises for so many reasons. The first is that you have never known silence, so the word is meaningless really. You have heard the word, you know what it means, but you do not really know what the experience of silence is, so it connotes nothing. The word falls on our ears; we believe that we understand, but nothing is understood. The actual word is unknown to us as far as experience is concerned, only the sound of the word is known.

Mulla Nasrudin was practising silence in a mosque with three other friends. It was a religious day, and they had taken a vow to be silent for twenty-four hours. This was to be their prayer. "Silence is prayer": they had heard this.

Just five or ten minutes after they started, the first man said, "I wonder whether I have locked my house or not!"

The second one said, "What are you doing? You have broken the silence and now you will have to start again!"

The third one said, "You fool! You have also broken it."

Mulla Nasrudin was the fourth. He said, "Praise be to Allah! I am the only one who has not broken the silence yet."

They have heard the word "silence". They have heard that silence is prayer.

Why does this happen? When someone else was breaking the silence everyone was aware, but when someone was himself breaking it he was not aware. Why? Because to them, to talk, to utter something, was breaking the silence. Really, you never hear whatsoever you say. When someone else says it, you hear it. You are so accustomed to your own sound and voice, you do not know what you are saying, that you are talking.

Another difficulty is that you are constantly talking inside, so when you utter something outwardly there is no difference for you. Inwardly, you were already talking. Now you have uttered something outwardly, but as far as you are concerned nothing has changed, nothing has happened. But when someone else utters something, for you something new has happened. He was silent before and now he has uttered something. If you yourself are talking within, then when you utter something you will not be aware. Someone else may become aware that now you have broken silence.

You are aware of others because inwardly you are constantly talking with yourself. A monologue, a continuous monologue is there. Awake or asleep, you are continuously talking. This continuous talk has become such a habit that you have not known any interval. When you are not talking inwardly, when you are talking with others, you feel relieved, relaxed, because when you are talking with others you are relieved of the duty of talking to yourself. And that is such a boring thing -- to talk with oneself. You already know what you are going to say, and still you have to continue.

No one else can be such a bore to you as you yourself are. You have told a particular thing to yourself millions of times, and again and again you are telling it. You are not very inventive. You go on in circles saying the same thing again and again. Watch! Watch for twenty-four hours and note down what you are saying to yourself. Then you will feel a weird feeling and strange, to see that you have been saying the same thing continuously all your life.

Even in a single day, you go on repeating yourself. This has become just a habit, deep-rooted. And when something becomes a deep-rooted habit, you are not aware of it. It becomes automatic. The robot part of your body takes it and continues it. That is why silence is very difficult, because silence really means breaking the monologue within. It is not a question of not talking to someone else. mouna, silence, is not really concerned with others. Deep down it is concerned with your own monologue.

Not to talk with yourself is very difficult, so we will have to Find out reasons why we talk with ourselves. Why do we go on talking with ourselves in the first place? If you observe, then you can find out the cause. The cause is that nothing is complete in our lives; everything is incomplete. You were eating, and then you were thinking about your office. So eating will not be satisfied; it will not be fulfilled; you will not feel content. It remains incomplete.

You eat hastily. You fill your stomach and you run to your office. A process has remained incomplete. Then when you are in your office, you begin to think about your wife, about your children, about a thousand things; then you are not in the office. The whole day, you have been there and still you were not there. The work in the office has remained incomplete, and now you have come to your house. Now you are thinking about your office. You are with your wife, but you are not -- you are absent.

It is a rare phenomenon that a husband is present with his wife -- rare! And it hurts much because the wife can feel it. The husband also feels that the wife is not present. No one is present; everything is incomplete. The mind has to continue the thing which you have left incomplete, and so many things are incomplete. So mind goes on continuously in circles, completing things that you have left incomplete.

Do you remember anything which you have completed? Do you have any moment in your life, any experience, which you can say is complete, total? If you have any experience which is complete, the mind will never go back to it. There is no need. There is no need! It is absolutely useless. The mind simply tries to complete everything. The mind has a tendency to complete. And this is necessary; otherwise life will be impossible.

So this constant monologue within is really a part of your wrong living -- incomplete living. Nothing is finished, and you go on making new beginnings. Then the mind goes on becoming piled up with incomplete things. They will never be completed, but they will create a burden on the mind -- a constant burden, a growing burden, an increasing burden -- and that creates the monologue.

That is why the older you grow, the more the monologue grows with you. And old men begin to talk aloud Really, the burden is so much that the control is lost. So look at old men. They will be sitting, and their legs will be working, and they will be talking, and they will be making gestures. What are they doing? You think they have gone crazy, that they are old and now they have become stupid. No, that is not the case. They have had a long incomplete life, and now death is coming nearer and mind is in haste, trying to complete everything. And it seems impossible! So if you really want to break this monologue, which means silence, then try to complete everything that you are doing. And do not start new things -- you will go crazy. Finish whatsoever you are doing, all the very small things.

You are taking a bath: make it complete. How to make it complete? Be there! Your presence will do it. Be there, enjoy it, live it, feel it. Be sensitive to the water falling on you, be saturated. Come out of your bath doing it completely, totally. Otherwise the bath will follow you. It will become a shadow; it will go with you. You are eating: then eat! Then forget everything! Then nothing exists in the world except your present act. Whatsoever you are doing, do it so completely so unhurriedly, so patiently, that the mind is saturated and becomes content. Only then leave it. Three months of continuous awareness about doing your acts completely will give you some intervals in your monologue. Then, for the first time, you will become aware that this monologue was a by-product of incomplete living.
Buddha has used the term "right living". He has shown an eight-fold path. In those eight principles, one is "right living". Right living means total living; wrong living means incomplete living.

If you are angry, then be really angry. Be authentically angry; make it complete. Suffer it! There is no harm in suffering because suffering brings much wisdom. There is no harm in suffering because only through suffering does one transcend it. Suffer it! But be authentically angry.
What are you doing? You are angry and you are smiling. Now the anger will follow you. You can deceive the whole world, but you cannot deceive yourself, you cannot deceive your mind. The mind knows very well that the smile was false. Now anger will continue inside; that will become a monologue. Then whatsoever you have not said you will have to say within. Whatsoever you have not done you will imagine as done. Now you will create a dream. You will fight with your enemy, with the object of your anger. The mind is helping you in completing a certain thing.

But that, too, is impossible because you are doing other things. Even this can be helpful: close your room -- you were not angry; the situation was such that you could not be -- close your room and now be angry, but do not continue the monologue. Act it out. There is no necessity to act it out on someone: a pillow will do. Fight with it, act your anger out, express it, but let it be authentic, real. Let it be real, and then you will feel a sudden relaxation inside. Then the monologue will drop, it will break. There will be an interval, a gap. That gap is silence.

So the first thing: break the monologue. And you can do it only if your living becomes a right, complete living. Never be incomplete. Release the inner madness. Not only one whole life: many whole lives that were incomplete is our situation.
When you love, you are doing a thousand things simultaneously. Then love becomes false. Now psychologists say that if you are loving someone and a thought crosses your mind, you have missed love. You are far away from your love object. There is a gap; the communion is broken. When two lovers are really in love, there is nothing else, simply love -- nothing else! They are playing with each other's bodies, absolutely absorbed in it. The whole world has dropped out of their consciousness; nothing is there. Then love is complete. And then they will not become sex maniacs. Then their minds will not be perverted minds.

Psychologists say that Don Juans like Byron, or others who go on changing their love objects, are really incapable of love. It is reported that Byron loved sixty women in his life, and his life was very short. And these are known cases. No one knows how many really. He was expelled from society because everyone became afraid. And he was such a beautiful person -- but why this madness?
One may think that he was a great lover. That was not the case. He was not a lover at all! Psychologists say he was not a lover at all. He was a maniac, just a perverted mind. He could not complete any love, and before any love could be consummated, completed, he had started another.

It is reported that he was forced to marry a girl. Of course, he was forced because he was not ready. How could he marry? The next day he would run after another woman. After he was forced, he was coming out of the church -- the bells were ringing and the guests were still there -- he was coming down the steps with his wife's hand in his hand, and suddenly he stopped; he let go of-the hand. A woman was crossing the street. His eyes followed the woman. Being an honest man in a way, he said to his wife, "Now you do not mean anything to me. That woman has become everything."

He suffered, because love is a growth. Love is a long growth. It grows, and the more it grows, the deeper it goes. Butterfly minds cannot grow in love. That is impossible because the love never acquires roots. Before the love can acquire roots, they have moved. This type of mind will suffer, because it cannot love and it cannot get love. Nothing is ever completed; nothing ever becomes ripe. Then the whole life will just be lived in wound -- incomplete wounds -- and this happens in every field.

You have never loved, you have never been angry, you have never acted spontaneously. You have not really eaten, you have not slept totally, you have not done anything with your total being in it, with your total involvement in it. You have always been doing something else simultaneously.

Bokuju was asked, "What is your SADHANA? (spiritual practice)? What are you doing here in this lonely forest? What are you doing?" Bokuju said, "I have no sadhana; I have no method. When I feel hungry I eat; when I do not feel hungry I fast. When I feel that the hut has become cold, I move out into the sun. When the sun is too much to bear, I move into the shadows of the trees. But wherever I am, I am total. When I feel sleepy, I drop down into sleep. This is all I am doing here."

The man said, "But this is nothing. Everyone is doing the same!"

Bokuju said, "If everyone were doing the same, the world would be quite a different place -- silent, peaceful, loving. Then there would be no need to ask for Liberation. This very world would be a MOKSHA."

No one is doing it. Bokuju's answer seems very simple, but it is not. It is very arduous. It is difficult just to sleep and not dream, because dreaming means there has been an incomplete day. It is now being completed in the dream. Whatsoever you have left incomplete in the day will be completed in the dream. So if you have been a good man, if you have tried to be a good man and the goodness was not natural to you, not something spontaneous but something forced, then in the dream you will move to the other extreme. If you have been honest with effort, then in the dream you will deceive someone. Then everything is complete.

Now psychologists say that if dreaming stops you will go mad, because dreaming releases much nonsense which you have left incomplete. And unless it is completed, it cannot evaporate: it cannot evaporate from your being. They say dreaming is the daily catharsis. So if you have not slept well, you will feel uneasy. It is not because you have not slept, it is because you could not dream.
Now they say sleep is not so essential. A man can live without sleep for many days, even for months and years. They say it is not so necessary. Dreaming is necessary, and you cannot dream without sleep; that is why sleep is needed. So sleep is needed only for dreaming.

But why is dreaming needed? You wanted to kill someone and you have not killed: you will kill him in your dream. That will relax your mind. In the morning you will be fresh: you have killed. I am not saying to go and kill so that you will not need any dream. But remember this: if you want to kill someone, close your room, meditate on the killing, and consciously kill him. When I say "kill him", I mean kill a pillow; make an effigy and kill it. That conscious effort, that conscious meditation, will give you much insight into yourself.

Remember one thing: make every moment complete. Live every moment as if there is no other moment to come. Then only will you complete it. Know that death can occur at any moment. This may be the last. Feel that "If I have to do something, I must do it here and now, COMPLETELY!"

I have heard a story about a Greek general. The king was somehow against him. There was a court conspiracy, and it was the general's birthday. He was celebrating it with his friends. Suddenly, in the afternoon, the king's manager came and he said to the general, "Excuse me, it is hard to tell you, but the king has decided that this evening, by six o'clock, you are to be hanged. So be ready by six o'clock."

Friends were there; music was there. There was drinking, eating and dancing. It was his birthday. This message changed the whole atmosphere. They became sad. But the general said, "Now do not be sad, because this is going to be the last part of my life. So let us complete the dance we were dancing and let us complete the feast we were having. I have no possibility now, so we cannot make it complete in the future. And do not send me off in this sad atmosphere, otherwise my mind will long again and again, and the stopped music and the halted festivity will become a burden on my mind. So let us complete it. Now is no time to stop it."

Because of him, they danced, but it was difficult. He alone danced more vigorously; he alone became more festive. But the whole group was simply mot there. His wife was weeping, but he continued to dance, he continued to talk with his friends. And he was so happy that the messenger went back to the king and he said, "That man is rare. He has heard the message, but he is not sad. And he has taken it in a very different way -- absolutely inconceivable. He is laughing and dancing and he is festive and he says that because there moments are his last and there is no future now, he cannot waste them: he must live them."

The king himself came to see what was happening there. Everyone was sad, weeping. Only the general was dancing, drinking, singing. The king asked, "What are you doing?"

The general said, "This has been my life principle -- to be aware continuously that death is possible any moment. Because of this principle I have lived every moment as much as was possible. But, of course, you have made it so clear today. I am grateful because until now I was only thinking that death is possible any moment. It was just a thinking. Somewhere, lurking behind, the thought was there that it was not going to be just the next moment. The future was there, but you dropped the future completely for me. This evening is the last. Life now is so short, I cannot postpone it."

The king was so happy, he became a disciple to this man. He said, "Teach me! This is the alchemy. This is how life should be lived; this is the art. So I am not going to hang you, but be my teacher. Teach me how to live in the moment."

We are postponing. That postponing becomes an inner dialogue, an inner monologue. Do not postpone. Live right here and now. And the more you live in the present, the less you will need this constant "minding", this constant thinking. The less you will need it! This is there because of postponing, and we go on postponing everything. We always live in the tomorrow which never comes and which cannot come; it is impossible. That which comes is always today, and we go on sacrificing today for tomorrow which is nowhere. Then the mind goes on thinking of the past which you have destroyed, which you have sacrificed for something which has not come. And then it goes on postponing for further tomorrows. That which you have missed, you go on thinking you will catch somewhere in the future.

You are not going to catch it! This constant tension between past and future, this constant missing of the present, is the inner noise. Unless it stops you cannot fall into that silence which is prayer. So the first thing: try to be total in every moment.

The second thing: your mind is so noisy because you always go on thinking that others are creating it, that you are not responsible. So you go on thinking that in a better world -- with a better wife, with a better husband, with better children, with a better house, in a better locality -- everything will be good and you will be silent. You think you are not silent because everything around is wrong, so how can you be?

If you think in this way, if this is your logic, then that better world is never to come. Everywhere this is the world, everywhere these are the neighbours, and everywhere these are the wives and these are the husbands and these are the children. You can create an illusion that somewhere heaven exists, but everywhere it is hell. With this type of mind, everywhere is hell. This mind is hell!

One day Mulla Nasrudin and his wife came to their home, to their house, late in the night. The house had been burglarized, so the wife began to scream and cry. Then she said to Mulla, "You are at fault! Why didn't you check the lock before we left?"

And by then the whole neighbourhood had come around. It was such a sensation! Mulla's house had been burglarized! Everyone joined in the chant. One neighbour said, "I was always expecting it. Why didn't you expect it before? You are so careless!" The second said, "Your windows were open. Why didn't you close them before you left the house?" The third one said, "Your locks appear to be faulty. Why didn't you replace them?" And everyone was pouring faults on Mulla Nasrudin.

Then he said, "One minute please! I am not at fault"

So the whole neighbourhood said in a chorus, "Then who do you think is at fault if you are not?"

Then Mulla said, "What about the thief?"

The mind goes on throwing the blame on someone else. The wife throws it on Mulla Nasrudin, the whole neighbourhood on Mulla Nasrudin, and the poor man cannot throw it on anyone present, so he says, "What about the thief?"

We go on throwing the blame on others. This gives you an illusory feeling that you are not wrong: someone else somewhere is wrong -- X-Y-Z. And this attitude is one of the basic attitudes of our mind. In everything someone else is wrong, and whenever we can find a scapegoat we are at ease, then the burden is thrown. For a religious seeker, this mind is of no help: this is a hindrance. This mind is the hindrance. We must realize that whatsoever the situation is, whatsoever the case is with you, you are responsible, no one else.

If you are responsible, then something is possible. If someone else is responsible, then nothing is possible. This is a basic conflict between the religious mind and the non-religious mind., The nonreligious mind always thinks that something else is responsible. Change the society, change the circumstances, change economic conditions, change the political situation, change something, and everything will be okay.

We have changed everything so many times, and nothing is okay. The religious mind says that whatsoever the situation, if this is your mind, then you will be in hell, you will be in misery. You won't be able to attain silence.
Put the responsibility on yourself. Be responsible, because then something can be done. You can only do something with yourself. You cannot change anyone in this world: you can only change yourself. That is the only revolution possible.

The only transformation possible is one's own, but that can be considered only when we feel that we are responsible. Why are you so noisy within? Why so much anxiety within? You are responsible. This is the first step. Then you cannot go and change the causes. The cause must be within; only then can it be changed.

In a similar situation to one which makes you uneasy, someone else may not be uneasy at all. A Buddha in the same situation will pass through it differently -- unscratched. Why? Why are you so disturbed by such situations? You were ready. You were just waiting for the situation. Someone is angry against you; you also become angry. You say it is because he did something. You say, "He created the stimulus; I only heard it. I was not angry: he made me angry."
But religious analysis is different. Religion says that anger is always yours. There was anger there to be stimulated. He stimulated it, of course, but something was within you -- the energy, the tendency, the habit to be angry was there. That is why he could stimulate it. If there had been no energy, no stored up anger, no repressed anger, no habit, then whatsoever he was doing would not have touched you at all. It touched you because you were ready to be touched. You were ready to explode; he simply created the situation and helped you. He was your helper! If there had been no one to create the situation, you would have created it yourself. You needed it! You needed it very badly!
Remember this when you become angry again. Analyze the whole thing, meditate on it, and then you will know that you were already getting ready. You were prepared and you were waiting, and this man who aroused your anger simply gave you a chance.

There was a case against Mulla Nasrudin in a court. Suddenly, without any reason, he had beaten his boy and then gone out of the house. So the magistrate asked, "What was the reason? Why did you do this suddenly? There was no fight; there was nothing. Why suddenly did you do this?"

The Mulla said, "I was standing by the door, and the door was open, and the street was vacant and there was no traffic. The stick was just handy, and the wife was looking toward the house, so I thought I should not miss the opportunity."
You will create opportunities if they are not given to you. You will not miss them: you will create them. If you become aware of this phenomenon, then something can be done. Then it is within your control to do something. The source is within, but you go on projecting it outside. Then you cannot do anything. If you go on projecting the causes outwardly, then you are helpless. What can you do? If someone stimulates you, creates anger in you, what can you do? You are just a helpless victim.

The second thing: remember, you are responsible for whatsoever you are. Even if someone gives you a chance, he gives you a chance to express yourself. It is always you who is ultimately, finally, responsible. Why this emphasis on one's own responsibility? Because if I am responsible, I will stop reacting. You do something, I react. Reaction is really a slavery. You are manipulating me. You can make me happy, you can make me miserable: then you are my master, I am your slave. If you smile at me, I am happy. Just a glance of angry eyes at me, and I am miserable. Then you are my master. If I think that you are responsible, then you remain my master and I remain your slave. If I am responsible, then you may go on smiling or you may do whatsoever you like. I will not react according to you: I will act according to me.
Mulla was sitting at a prayer-meeting in a mosque. His shirt was rather short and the man behind him thought it looked unseemly, so he pulled it down. Suddenly, immediately, Mulla pulled the shirt of the man in front of him. The man asked, "What are you doing?"

He said, "Don't ask me. This man behind me started the whole thing. I am not responsible. I have simply reacted. If this is the way a mosque prayer is done, I have to follow."

You go on doing things because someone is doing them to you. You go on passing them on. You may not be aware of it. Are you aware that when you are telling something to your children you are simply repeating whatsoever was told by your father to you? This is Mulla Nasrudin. Are you aware of it? The way you are behaving with your wife is the way you saw your father behaving with your mother. You are just passing things on. You are no one -- just a passage. What are you doing?

When you are with your servant, have you observed the way you behave? Is this not the way your boss behaves with you in the office? What are you doing? You are just a part of a long chain. Then you cannot be silent. How can you be silent? You are being pulled and manipulated from everywhere, and you are just vulnerable to everything, every nonsense. If someone is angry, you say, "I simply reacted. Why was he angry with me?" Why? He was angry; it was his business. How are you related? But now you feel it a duty, and whatsoever is being done to you, you will do the same religiously.

Remember, you are not a slave and no one has imposed this slavery on you. It is self-imposition. Throw it! Be a master! Only then can you be silent. Only a master can be silent. And when I say "master", I mean a person who acts from within -- who is not reacting. We are always reacting; there is no action in our lives. The moment you can act, you will feel a deep silence within -- because now you have become a master. No one can disturb you. Now you are not helpless.

Buddha is passing. Someone abuses him. He listens to it, and then he turns to Ananda and says, "Ananda, this was a long debt. Now it is paid. In some life I must have abused him. Now no more chain. Thank you, friend," Buddha said to that man. "Now the account is closed. I am not going to react." Buddha says, "Reaction is rebirth. If you react, you will have to be born again and again because you are in a chain. Accounts are not closed. Everything is open."

The day Buddha died, he gathered all his monks. Ten thousand monks were there. He said, "Now this body is to drop, so do you want to ask anything? Because now, no more can I be. No more will I be in this world!"

So someone asked, "Why? Why are you leaving us?"

Buddha said, "Now everything is paid. The whole account is closed. I was waiting only for the account to be closed completely. Now nothing is left; I am a master. I have transcended the chain. Now I am no more amidst you."

So a third point: become a master. Whatsoever you are doing, do it as an action, never as a reaction. Resist the temptation to react. That is the only evil, the only sin -- to react. Laugh if you feel to laugh, but do not laugh as a reaction. Weep if you are feeling to weep, but do not weep as a reaction. Stop reactions! Act! If these three things are there, you will drop into the silence which is prayer.

This sutra says, "Silence is the prayer -- mounam stutihi." When you are silent, with no monologue within, no anxiety within, no reactions within, with nothing incomplete or suspended, everything complete and finished, you become a space, just a space -- infinite, because all the boundaries are your reactions, all the boundaries are your anxieties, all the boundaries of your being are just your madhouses. When you are silent, you are infinite space.

But why does this sutra call it prayer? Why bring prayer in? Better to call it meditation. Why call it prayer? When you are silent, it is meditation. Why bring prayer in? It is not brought unnecessarily -- because when you become an infinite space, the Divine descends in you. You have called, you have invoked. When you are totally silent, you have become a host. Now the Divine guest can come. And only in this emptiness, in this silence, in this nothingness, can the Divine guest come. This is the only invitation, the only invocation. This is the only prayer.

Prayer means asking for the Divine to come, asking the Divine to be a guest to you. Words won't do, invitations won't do. Whatsoever you do -- cry, weep -- it won't do. First become a host. Silence is becoming a host. Now you are ready. Now there is no need to pray, now there is no need to request. No invitation is needed -- the Divine descends. When you are silent the Divine is there.

It will be better to say it in other terms: the Divine is always there, but you cannot feel it because you are not silent. The guest is there, but the host is asleep. The guest is there, but the host is unaware. The guest has already come before the host, but the host is wandering somewhere else. That wandering is the mind.

Have you observed that your mind is a wandering? Mind means wandering. You are not here: that is what mind means. You are somewhere else. If you are here, then there is no mind, then there is no wandering. Mind cannot be in the present: it can only be in the past or in the future. Mind can never be here-now. It can only be there-then. It is a wandering. When you are a mind you are wandering somewhere else, but the guest is present always.

Buddha was asked when he became Enlightened, "What have you gained?"

He said, "Nothing -- because whatsoever I now feel as a gain was already there, only I was unaware. So it would be better to say, I should say, that I have not gained anything. Rather, I have lost much. I have lost my 'self' which was there too much really -- which was there TOO MUCH! I have lost my self and I have gained that which was always, eternally present."

One has to come back to his home. This homecoming is silence, this returning to your home is silence. And the rishi says that it is prayer, because when you are silent the invitation has reached. You have invoked. You have prayed! And in prayer many things are implied. If you pray, and if it is really a prayer, then there is no gap between your prayer and the answer to your prayer. If there is a gap, it means that the prayer was false.

If you are silent, the Divine is there; there is no gap. If you are silent and you find that the Divine is not there, remember, you are not silent. Even this thought that "the Divine should come to me", creates disturbance.
Buddha has said that even the longing for the Divine is a disturbance. Then you are not totally silent. You are asking, and you have moved. You have wandered, you have gone away. If you are asking for freedom, for eternal life, for immortality, for Heaven, for anything, if you are longing, you have wandered. Total silence means total acceptance of whatsoever is -- of that which is. So the last thing to be understood: silence basically means total acceptance.

Non-acceptance creates noise in the mind, in the being. Whenever you say no to anything, your mind begins to move and work. Whenever you say yes, your mind stops. "No" is the starter, "yes" is the stopper. astik means a theist. In Sanskrit the word astik, theist, means one who has said a total and final yes to everything. Now he will never say no. Now this yes is ultimate. No going back!

Acceptance means you accept whatsoever is the case. If there is anger, you accept it. If there is suffering, you accept it. If there is lust, greed, you accept it. If there is anxiety, worry, you accept it. You accept everything! and, then, how is it possible to be disturbed? When one accepts everything, disturbance is impossible. So in the last analysis, silence means total acceptance.

Buddha has given it a name: he calls it TATHATA -- suchness. He says that whatsoever is, is. Whatsoever is, IS! Accept it, and then you are silent. Say no, deny, reject, try to change, and you have created disturbance. This silence is prayer and this silence cannot be created, cannot be forced.

In life, all that is valuable, all that is of any value at all, is always a consequence of many, many things. You cannot approach it directly. For example, happiness: you cannot approach it directly. And those who try to achieve happiness directly will become most unhappy -- and only because of their effort. When you are doing something, totally absorbed in it, happiness happens.

A painter painting: he has forgotten himself completely in the act. He is totally there. He is no more, really. Really, a great painter never paints. Painting happens! Just as we say it rains, "it paints".

Van Gogh was asked once, "Which of your paintings is the best?"

And Van Gogh said, "But I have never painted anything. I cannot say. and if you insist, then I can say only this one which is being painted JUST NOW! But I am not the painter: the painting is happening. The painter is not there. The painter has ceased!"

Van Gogh can have a happiness not of the world. A singer, a dancer, can have a happiness which doesn't belong to this world. But that is really a consequence of something else.

Silence is also a consequence of many things -- of right living, of right action, of right acceptance, of being a right host. Then suddenly, silence happens. It is there -- it has always been there.

============================================================

Soham bhavo namaskarah.

The feeling of I am That – So-aham – is the salutation.
Existence is one, or, rather, existence is oneness. Al-Hillaj Mansoor was crucified because he said, “I am the beloved, I am the divine, I am That which created the world.” Islam was totally unacquainted with this type of language. This language is basically Hindu. Wherever man has contemplated, man has come to duality: God, the creator, and the world, the created. Hinduism has taken the boldest jump by saying that the created is the creator and there is no basic difference.
To Islam, or to other dualistic thinkings, this looks like sacrilege. If there is no difference between God and the world, between man and God, then for dualistic thinkers it appears there is no possibility of religion, no possibility of worship, no possibility of salutation. If you are divine, then whom are you going to worship? If you are the creator, then who is superior to you? Worship becomes impossible.
But this sutra says this is the only worship, this is the only salutation:
The feeling of I am That – So-aham – is the salutation.
Ordinarily, this sutra is absurd, contradictory – because if there is no higher power than you, if you are the highest, then whom are you going to salute? To whom are you going to pay your respects? This is the reason Mansoor was murdered, killed and crucified. This is heresy! He was thought to be a heretic, a nastik, an atheist. If you say you are God, you deny godhood. Then you are the supreme.
For a dualistic way of thinking, this is egoistic. The division must be maintained. You must come nearer and nearer, but you must not become the flame itself. You must become intimate with the divine source, but you must not become one with it. Then respect is possible, worship is possible.
So you can reach to the divine feet, but you cannot become one with the divine flame. How can the creature become the creator? And if the creature becomes the creator, that means the creature was not a creature at all. And if the created becomes the creator, that means there is no creator.
This is one type of religious thinking, the dualistic type. It has its own reasoning and it appeals to our ordinary minds. So, really, even those who are born Hindus are not Hindus unless they can come to conceive the attitude of being one with the creator. One may be born a Hindu, but there is no basic difference between the Hindu, the Mohammedan and the Christian attitude: the actual attitude – the attitude we live and the attitude we behave by.
A Hindu is really a deep absurdity, because he takes the impossible jump: the created becomes the creator. And this sutra says this is the only salutation. If God is there high above and you are here low down, if in you something is not divine already, there is no bridge possible. You cannot be related. You can be related only if you are already related; otherwise there will be an unbridgeable gap. God remains God and you remain just a creature.
Because of this, a third attitude developed – the attitude of the Jainas. They deny God altogether because they say: If there is a God as a creator and we are just created beings, we can never become gods. How can something created by you become you? The created will remain the created.
And the creator will always have the capacity to destroy you, because creation means also the capacity to destroy, the capacity for destruction. If God has created the world, he can destroy it this very moment. He is not responsible to you. You cannot ask why, because you have never asked why he created the world. So this very moment, just a whim in the divine mind, and the world can be destroyed. With all your holy men, with all your sinners, the world can be destroyed this very moment.
So if there is a God, Jainas say, then man is not really a spirit – just a created thing, not a soul, because then you don’t have any freedom. If God is the creator, then man is not free. And then everything becomes meaningless: whether you are good or bad, it is meaningless. The God remains the supreme power. He can do anything, he can undo anything.
And he is not responsible to you. You have created a mechanical device, you can destroy it. You are not responsible to your mechanical creation. A painter creates a painting; he can destroy it. The painting cannot say, “You cannot destroy me.”
And if God is the creator and man is just a created thing, how can the created thing evolve and become divine? That is impossible. So Jainas say there is no God. Only then can man become divine, because only then is man free. With a God we are slaves, with no God we are free.
Nietzsche has said, without knowing that Mahavira has said this before him, “Now God is dead and man is free.” The same was the problem for Mahavira: if God is there, then man is not free. God’s being is man’s slavery, God’s nonbeing is man’s freedom. So Mahavira says there is no God – only then can you become divine.
Mohammedans, Christians, Jews, they say God is, man is, but man is just a created being. He can worship the divine and come nearer. The nearer he comes, the more he will be filled with divine light, bliss, ecstasy. But you cannot become one with the divine, because if you can become one with the divine that shows you were potentially already one with the divine, because nothing can happen in this world which is not already in the seed. A tree evolves because the tree was in the seed. If you can become divine, you were already divine.
So Jews, Christians and Mohammedans say if you are already divine, then religion becomes meaningless. If you are already divine in the seed, then there is no real evolution, then there is no growth. And whatsoever you do or don’t do, you will remain divine.
Christians, Mohammedans and Jews say religious growth is possible only if man is man and God is God. You come nearer and nearer, and that coming nearer is a growth. It is your choice. You may not come near, you may go far away – this is your freedom. But if you are already divine, then, Jews, Mohammedans and Christians say, then there is no real growth. All growth becomes illusory, just a dream growth. You were bound to become divine because in the seed you were already divine. So the whole thing becomes hocus-pocus, they say; the whole evolution becomes meaningless.
Hindus take a standpoint just between these two standpoints. They agree with Jainas that man is divine and they agree with Christians, Mohammedans and Jews that there is God as the creator. And still, they say, there is growth, there is evolution. Not only that: they say only then is growth possible. But to them growth means just unfoldment. A seed grows, and the growth is real, authentic, because a seed may not grow and may remain a seed forever; there is no inner necessity to grow. But a seed grows only to be a particular tree because that tree is already potential in it.
Man can remain man, or man may even fall down and become animal, or man can grow to be divine. This is choice. This is freedom. But this possibility, that man can become divine, shows that somewhere deep down in the seed form man is already divine. So it is an unfoldment. Something hidden becomes actual, something potential becomes actual, something that was just a seed becomes a tree.
So, in a way, the Hindus’ God is totally different from the Mohammedans’ and the Christians’ God, because for Hindus man can become God. And they say that if you cannot become God, then even the concept of coming nearer and nearer is false – because if you cannot jump into the flame, what does it mean to come nearer and nearer? Then what is the difference between you and someone who is not near? If you can come nearer, then the logical conclusion will be: more near, more near, more near, and ultimately you become one. If you cannot become one, then there is a limit, a boundary, and beyond that boundary and limit there will be a gap between you and the divine. That gap cannot be tolerated. And if there is a gap which it is not possible to bridge, the whole effort is useless.
Hindus say unless you become the divine itself, the urge will not be fulfilled. And the nearer you are, the more you will feel the gap, and the more you will suffer. And when you come to the boundary line from where no growth is possible, you will stagnate and you will die, and the suffering will be unbearable, absolutely unbearable.
Man can become divine because he is already divine, and Hindus say you can become only that which you are already. You cannot become that which you are not already; you cannot grow to be something else. You can grow to be yourself only. This attitude has many dimensions, and we will try to understand.
One, God as the creator. We can think of him as a painter, but Hindus have not thought that way. They say the creator is not a painter but a dancer – hence Shiva the dancer. In dance the dancer is creating something, but the creation is not something separate from the creator. In painting the painter and painting are two things. The painter can die and the painting may remain. And the moment the painting is complete, it is independent of the painter completely. Now it will take its own course.
Hindus say God is a creator like a dancer. A dancer is there dancing: the dance is the creation, but you cannot separate it from the dancer. If the dancer dies the dance will die, and if the dance continues the dancer will be there.
One thing more, basically important: the dancer can exist without the dance, but the dance cannot exist by itself. The dance cannot exist without the dancer, but the dancer can exist without the dance. Hindus say this world is a creation in this way: God is dancing, so whatsoever is created is part and parcel of it.
Another thing: a painter paints – he can complete the painting and then go to sleep. But a dance is a constant creation. The God cannot go to sleep. So the world was not created on a particular day. It is being created every moment. Christians think the world was created on a particular day and date, and before that there was no world. In a week – in six days, to be exact – the God created the world, and on the seventh day he rested. Now, even if he exists, he is needed no longer. He may have died in the meantime. The painter can die and the painting can continue. The painter may have gone mad, the painting remains as it was.
Hindus say the world was not created: it is being created every moment. It is a constant flux of creation, it is a continuum of creation. So, really, if you see it in this way, then God is not a person, God is energy. Then God is not something static; it is movement, dynamic, because a dance is a dynamic movement. You have to be in it every moment, only then can it exist. Dance is an expression, a living expression, and you have to be in it continuously.
The world is a dance, not a painting. And everything is part of this dance, every gesture is divine. So Hindus say a very beautiful thing. They say: If everything is not divine, then nothing can be divine. If everything is not holy, then nothing can be holy. If everything is not God, then there is no possibility of any God.
This is one dimension, to see this oneness. They never say it is oneness, they always say it is nondual – because Hindus think that to say that the world is one, existence is one, gives you a feeling that one can exist only if something else also exists.
One is a number, and one can exist only if other numbers exist – two, three, four. If there are no other numbers, one becomes meaningless. Then what do you mean by one? Because there are nine digits, from one to nine, one is meaningful. It is meaningful in a pattern of digits, numbers. If there is only one, you cannot say it is one. Then numbers become meaningless.
Hindus say that existence is nondual, not one. They mean it is one, but they say it is nondual, they say it is not two. This is a noncommittal statement. If you say “one” you have made a commitment, you have committed yourself in many ways. If you say one, you are saying that you have measured it. If you say one, you are saying it is finite.
Hindus say existence is nondual. They mean it is one, but they say it in a roundabout way. It is very meaningful. They say it is nondual, it is not two; this way they only indicate that it is one. It is never said directly, only indicated: it is not two.
This is also meaningful, because when we say the dancer and the dance are one, then there will be many difficulties. If the dance ceases, the dancer will cease – if they are one. Hindus say instead they are not two. The dancer will be there even if the dance ceases, but the dance cannot be there if the dancer ceases.
This nondualness is hidden, the duality is manifest. Manyness is manifest, oneness is hidden. But this manyness can exist only because of that hidden oneness. Trees are different, the earth is different, the sun is different, the moon is different, but now science says that deep down everything is related and one. The trees cannot grow if there is no sun. But we have come to know only this one-way traffic. We know trees cannot grow and flowers cannot flower if the sun ceases to be. But Hindus say it’s true, trees cannot grow if there is no sun, but if there are no growing trees, the sun cannot exist either. This is a two-way traffic: everything is related.
Jainas say if there is God, then man will be a slave. Mohammedans say if man declares, “I am God,” then the God is dethroned and the slave pretends to be the master. Hindus say there is neither independence nor dependence: existence is interdependence – interdependence. So to talk in terms of dependence and independence is meaningless. The whole exists as an interdependent whole. Nothing is high and nothing is low, because the high cannot exist without that which you call low.
Can the peak exist without the valley? Can the holy man exist without the sinner? Can beauty exist without that which you call ugliness? And if beauty cannot exist without ugliness, then it depends on ugliness. And if the peak cannot exist without the valley, then what is the meaning of calling the peak something high and calling the valley something low?
Hindus say the lowest is the highest and the highest is the lowest. By declaring this, they mean that this whole world is a deeply interdependent pattern. And all religions are arbitrary: they are good for thinking, for analyzing, for understanding, but basically they are false. And this is the longest jump.
The rishi says:
Soham bhavo namaskarah.

The feeling of I am That – So-aham – is the salutation.
Unless the lowest can feel that he is the highest, he cannot be at home in this universe. But this is not a declaration, this is a feeling. You can declare that “I am God” and that may not be a deep feeling at all. That may be just an egoistic assertion. If you say, “I am God,” and you say, “No one else is God,” then you have not felt it. When it is a feeling, it is not a declaration on your part – it is a declaration on the part of the whole existence.
When the rishi says, “I am God, I am That,” he is saying everything is God, everything is That. With him the whole existence declares it. So it is not a personal statement. Al-Hillaj was crucified because Islam couldn’t understand this language. Al-Hillaj said, “I am God.” They thought, “Al-Hillaj is saying that ‘I am God.’” It was not al-Hillaj at all; it was simply that al-Hillaj became vocal on the part of the whole existence. It was the whole existence, through al-Hillaj, speaking, declaring. Al-Hillaj was no more – because if he is, then this declaration becomes personal. This is the second dimension.
Man exists in three categories. One, when he says “I am” without knowing who he is. This is the ordinary existence of everyone: “I am” – without knowing who I am. The second stage is when he comes to know “I am not” – because the deeper you ponder over this I-amness, the more you dig, the more you will find you are not, and the whole phenomenon of “I” disappears. You cannot find it. So there is no question of making it disappear; you simply don’t find it, it is not there.
If you exist without any inward search, then you go on feeling “I am.” If you begin to search, you will come to know that you are not. This is the second state: when man comes to know that “I am not.” First he was probing deep into the phenomenon of “I am”; now he will have to probe into the second phenomenon of “I am not.”
This is most arduous. The first is difficult, very difficult. Even to come to the second is a long journey. Many stay at the first. They never probe into “Who am I?” Only very few go into a deep search to know who it is that says “I am.” Then amongst those few, very few will go again on a new journey to know what this “I am not” is, what this feeling that “I am not” is. “Still I am, but now I cannot say ‘I am.’ I feel as if there is a deep emptiness.”
Hindus have said the first is “I-amness.” The second is simply “amness.” The I has dropped, but my existence is there. Even if I am empty, nothing, I am. This they call amness. The first they call ahankar, ego; the second they call asmita, amness. If someone goes deep into ahankar, the ego, he comes to asmita, amness. And now, if someone goes again deep into this amness, he comes to divineness. Then he says, “I am That – aham brahmasmi – I am godliness.” Through emptiness one becomes all. Through nonbeing one becomes the very ground of being. Dissolving, one becomes all.
This sutra, Soham bhavo namaskarah, is the feeling of the third state. When man has dissolved completely, ego has disappeared. Even amness is not a finite thing now. One has come to the very source, as if you were just a gesture in a dance – just a gesture in a dance. You probed deep, and now you have come to the dancer. Now, a gesture of dance is, “I am the dancer.”
This going in…first you go into yourself, but you are related to the universe. So if you continue, then you are stepping down into existence. If you keep on continuing, then from the periphery one day you will come to the center.
A leaf in the wind has its own individuality. If the leaf begins to travel inwards, sooner or later it will go beyond itself: it will enter into the branch. If it goes on, then sooner or later it will not be the leaf, it will not be the branch: it will become the tree. If it goes on, sooner or later it will not be the tree: it will become the roots. And if it still continues, sooner or later it will become the existence: it will go beyond the roots.
But a leaf can remain with itself without moving in. Then the leaf can think, “I am.” This is the first state. If the leaf moves, sooner or later it will find, “I am not the leaf. I am more: I am the branch.” Then, “I am not the branch. I am even more: I am the tree.” And then, “Not even the tree, I am more: I am the roots, the hidden roots.” And if the journey goes on, from the roots also it will take a jump – it will become the whole existence.
So this is a feeling, a realization. And this is the more difficult part, because intellectually your ego would like to declare that you are God, you are divine. Intellect tries always to be on high, at the peak. The very effort of the ego is to be something supreme. So this can appeal to you, this can appeal to the ego: “Okay this is right – I am God.”
But this sutra says this is the salutation. Salutation is a deep humility, a humbleness. It is not to put yourself on the peak, because then there is no one whom you can salute. That was the problem before Islam when al-Hillaj declared. He was declaring himself God. “This is not humbleness – this is the climax of being egoistic!” So those who killed him, killed him very righteously, in good faith. This was the peak of ego.
This sutra is contradictory. It declares, “You are That – this is the salutation.” If this is felt and realized, then the peak will salute the valley, because now there is nothing other than the divine. And now the peak will realize that it is dependent on the valley. Then light will salute the darkness and life will salute death, because everything is interdependent, interrelated.
At this peak of realization one becomes humble, because this declaration that “I am God” is not against anyone. It is for all: “Now, through me, everything is declaring its divinity.”

Many people were there when al-Hillaj was killed, many were throwing stones. He was laughing, he was prayerful, he was loving. There was a Sufi fakir also present in the crowd. The whole crowd was throwing stones, and the Sufi fakir, just to be one with the crowd, to not let them feel that he didn’t belong to them, threw a flower. He couldn’t throw a stone, so he threw a flower – just to be with the crowd, so everyone would feel that he was amongst them, belonged to them.
Mansoor began to weep. When the Sufi’s flower hit him, he began to weep. The Sufi became uneasy. He came nearer and he asked Mansoor, “Why? They are throwing stones and you are laughing and you are praying for them? And I have thrown only a flower!”
Mansoor said, “Your flower hits me more because you know. And this is not a declaration of me; I have declared for you – and you know, so your flower hits me more. Their stones are just like flowers, because they don’t know – that this has been a declaration for them. If Mansoor can be divine,” said Mansoor, “then everything can be divine. If even Mansoor can be divine, then everything can be divine.” Mansoor said, “Look at me! I was no one and yet I declare I am divine. Now everything can be divine.”

This is a declaration, not from the ego: this is a declaration from the nonego realization. When one begins to feel that one is nothing, only then can one come to this. Then it is humble. Then it is the most humble possibility. It becomes a salutation – a salutation to the whole existence. Then the whole existence has a divinity.
Mystics have denied temples, mosques, churches, not because they are meaningless, but because the whole cosmos is a temple. Mystics have denied statues, not because they are meaningless, but because the whole existence is the divine image. But to understand their language is difficult. They appear to us as anti-religious – denying statues, denying images, denying temples, churches, denying scriptures, denying everything that we believe to be religious. But they are denying only because the whole is divine. You cannot make a part of it divine. And if you insist on the part, that shows you don’t know about the whole.
If I say, “This temple is divine,” just by saying this, I have said that the whole universe is not divine. If this temple is just part of a greater temple, then it is a different thing. But if this temple is against the whole, against other temples – not only against other temples: if this temple is against any ordinary house even, if this temple says that houses are not holy and only temples are holy – it is a denial of the whole.
For the whole, mystics have denied the parts. But for us there is no whole. We don’t know anything about the whole. So even when the part is denied, it is uncomfortable, because that’s all we know. And if someone says, “There is no temple!” it is enough for us that he is not religious. He may be saying only this: “Because everything is a temple, don’t make anything in particular a temple. Don’t say anything in particular is divine, because everything is divine.” This is the salutation.
We are also worshiping. We go to the temples, to the mosques, to bow. We bow down, but the ego remains standing. It is only a bodily movement. The inner ego remains unmoved. Rather, it may become even more straight – because you have been to the temple, you have been to the tirth, you have been on a holy pilgrimage, you have been to Kaaba. Now you are no ordinary person: you are religious! So you bowed down, but it was a bodily gesture. Your ego is more strengthened. It has been a food for your ego. It has been vitalized, it is not dead.
That’s why so-called religious persons will always be more egoistic than ordinary, worldly persons. They have something more that you don’t have. They are religious: they pray daily. When you go to a cinema hall your ego may not be strengthened, but when you go to a temple it is strengthened because you can never feel in a temple that you are guilty.
You may feel in a cinema hall that you are guilty, you may feel in a hotel that you are guilty, but you can never feel in a temple that you are guilty. You feel superior, you become more respectable. You gain something in terms of ego. Look at the faces of persons coming out from the temple, observe: their egos are more straightened. They are coming out with some gain. This has been a vitamin!
You can bow down without bowing down at all – and that is the problem. Bowing must be inner. And if then the body follows, it is a deep experience; even in the body it is a deep experience. If you are bowing inwardly because everything is divine, so that wherever you bow down you are at the feet of the divine, if with this feeling your body moves, then your body will also have a deep experience. And you will come out of it more simple, more innocent, more humble.
But what to do? Many things man has invented – they have not helped. And man’s ego is so subtle and so cunning that it can deceive you in such subtle ways that you cannot detect them. If there is a God somewhere in the heaven you can bow to him and you can still behave egoistically with the whole existence – because “this world is not divine.” Your divinity, your God, is somewhere high in the heaven. To this world you can go on behaving as you were behaving, and you can behave even worse because now you are related to the supreme authority. Now you have a direct link. You can dial any moment to the supreme authority; you can tell him to do anything.

Jesus is passing through a village. The village is antagonistic. They will not shelter the disciples or Jesus; they have refused. They will not give any food, not even water, so they have to move to another village.
The disciples say to Jesus, “This is the moment. Show your miracle: destroy this village! Such irreligious people should not exist.” These are the disciples who later on created the whole of Christianity. “Destroy this village this very moment. This is the time, show your miracle!”
They are saying to Jesus, “Now prove that you are the Son, the Only Begotten Son. Now tell your Father who is high in the heavens to destroy this village this very moment.”
Why this arrogance? Why this anger? And they were prayerful people. They were praying daily, they were living with Jesus. Why this arrogance? If there were some ordinary people in their place… Because the villagers have only refused to give food. This is not a sin. This is up to them. If I come to your house and you refuse me food, okay; it is up to you. Why this arrogance?
And the whole village has not denied them. There were small children and old men: they had not denied them – only a few people. But the disciples say, “Destroy this whole village. This whole village must be destroyed this very moment.” The trees have not denied them shelter, but they are asking Jesus to destroy everything that belongs to that village. Why?
Through prayer, through salutation, through worship, they have become more arrogant. They are not humble people; humility is far from them. And if they are not humble, how can they be religious? But why did this become possible? Because of this attitude: “God is in heaven. The person who has denied me food is not divine, the village is not divine. God is somewhere in heaven and we are God’s chosen people. These people are anti-God – destroy them!”

Real humility is possible only when God is not far away. It is your neighbor every moment. Wherever you are, it is your neighbor. To put God somewhere else, far away, is very easy, convenient, because then you can behave as you like with your neighbor and God is always on your side.
I was reading:

One French general was talking to an English general after the Second World War. The French general said, “We were continuously defeated and you were not defeated. Why is this so?”
The English general said, “This is because of prayer. We pray – before we start any fight, we pray.”
The French general said, “But that we also do.”
The English general said, “That’s okay, but we pray in English and you pray in French. From where did you get this idea that God knows French? He cannot know it.”

This is how the so-called religious mind becomes arrogant. Sanskrit is the “only sacred language.” You can laugh at this anecdote, but now laugh: “Sanskrit is the only sacred language and the Vedas are the only scriptures written by God himself. The Koran – how is it possible? From where did you get the idea that God knows Arabic? He knows only Sanskrit!” Then “God is always on my side. Or, if he insists not to be on my side, I can change my god. That is always within my capacity. So because of that fear he always remains on my side. It is my god – he has to follow me!”
This attitude is created because of the idea that the whole existence is not divine. If the whole existence is divine, then the divine even understands the language of trees – not only Sanskrit and Arabic, but even the language of the stones. And then it is not a problem of language at all, then language is irrelevant. It is not prayer which is meaningful now, it is a prayerful mind. And a prayerful mind is something totally different from a praying mind.
This sutra says this is the only salutation, the only humbleness possible, but in a very paradoxical way: “I am God – to feel this is the salutation.”
We would like to say, “You are God,” and then it is easy to salute. But this sutra says, “I am God – this is the only salutation.” We will ask to whom….
There is no need really to salute. There is no need to salut – it is not an activity, it is not something you have to do. If the whole existence is divine, then whatsoever you are doing, it is a salutation.

Kabir was asked…because he continued to work as he was working before his enlightenment. He was a weaver, he continued weaving. Disciples would come from far, very, very faraway places, and they would say, “Why? – you are an enlightened one, you are now a buddha – why do you continue weaving?”
Kabir would say, “This is the only prayer I know – this is the only prayer I know. I was a weaver, so I know only this way to salute him.”
Someone asked Kabir, “But Buddha, when he became enlightened, left everything.”
Kabir is reported to have said, “He was a king. He knew only one way: to be a king. But I am a weaver, a poor weaver, so I know only one way. This is my prayer. When I am weaving these clothes, I am weaving them for the divine.”
And then Kabir would go to the market to sell them. So someone asked him, “But you go to the market to sell them. You say these are for the divine, then go to the temple and put them at the divine feet?”
Kabir said, “I put them always at the divine feet, but my gods are waiting there in the market – my Rama is waiting there. And I believe in living gods.”
This attitude needs no salutation. This is not now an act to be done; rather, it is a way to live. Your prayer can be just a part of your act, just one act among many. But to persons like Kabir it is not an act, it is a way to live. So Kabir says, “Whatsoever I am doing is prayer – whatsoever I am doing is prayer!”

It can be, but then the whole existence must be divine. Then whatsoever you are doing…then if you are eating, it is prayer because it goes to the existence. Then it is not you who are eating, but the existence through you. Then you are moving or walking – it is prayer, because it is existence moving through you, walking through you.
Then you are dying… it is prayer, because it is existence taking back: that which was given, manifested, becoming unmanifested. Then you are not in between. You are no more. You are just an opening – just an opening for the existence, a window. Existence moves through you, in and out. You are nowhere in between.
At this moment of nothingness, man can say, “Aham brahmasmi, I am the absolute, I am That.” This is not an egoistic assertion. This is one of the humblest of assertions, but it looks very paradoxical.
Life is such a complexity that if you have to assert simple truths you have to be paradoxical. If you are asserting complex truths you need not be paradoxical; you can be very logical. This has to be understood: only very simple truths are difficult to express, because the more simple they become, the more nondual. And when it comes to the very center, then the statement has to imply all dualities.
Look at it in this way: the Upanishads say the absolute is near and the absolute is far away. If you say it is only near, it is false; if you say it is only far away, it is false – because that which is near can become far and that which is far can become near. You can move, you are already moving. It is everywhere. This simple truth has to be expressed in a very paradoxical way. It is the nearest and the most far. It is the minutest and the greatest. It is the seed and the tree. It is the birth and the death, because if it is life then it must be both birth and death.
But why not simply say that he is life? Because in our minds life is against death. So this simple truth, that he is life, cannot be asserted in this way. It has to be asserted in a paradoxical way: he is birth and he is death. He is both. He is life only because he is both. He is the friend and the foe, because the foe can become a friend and the friend can become a foe. He is both! We would like him to be the friend and never the foe, but our likings are not truths. Really, unless our likings and dislikings cease we cannot come to the truth, because we go on choosing and projecting.
This statement is again a paradox. The first part of it – the feeling that I am divine, I am That – is the peak. And the second – the salutation – is the valley. Valley and peak both! The most egoistic assertion possible: I am That. And then, falling down unto the feet of everything: the salutation. These are two extremes, two polar opposites, and many things are implied.
If you feel that you are inferior and then you bow down, it is not a salutation. If you feel that you are inferior and then bow down, it is not a salutation, it is just part of your inferiority. If you say, “I am superior and cannot bow down,” then you are not really superior, because one who cannot bow down is dead. He cannot be superior. And one who cannot bow down is still afraid somewhere for his superiority, afraid that “If I bow down I will not be superior.” Only one who is at ease with his superiority can bow down. Only one who has gone beyond his inferiority can bow down. And this is the highest peak possible – I am That – and then bowing down.

Buddha has told his past-life memoires. In one he says, “I was just ignorant.” Buddha says, “I was just ignorant. Then a buddha, a person who had become enlightened, passed through my village. I went to touch his feet, I touched his feet, but then suddenly I became aware that he was doing something. He was bowing down and he touched my feet. I became afraid and I said, ‘What are you doing? I should touch your feet – that is as it should be – but why are you touching my feet?’”
That enlightened one said to Gautam Buddha, “You are touching my feet because I am a buddha. I am touching your feet because you are a buddha also.”
Gautam Buddha, in his past life, said to him, “But I am not. I am ignorant. I am no one.”
The enlightened one said to him, “Because you don’t know what you are, you don’t know what you can become. You are bowing to a present buddha, I am bowing to a future buddha. I have become manifest, you will become manifest. It is only a question of time.”

This bowing down of an enlightened man is the secret of this sutra. He was a peak, and he is bowing down to an ignorant man. Now from his peak he can see another peak which is hidden in ignorance. It is not hidden for him; to him it is as clear as anything.
You can bow down to this ordinary existence only when you feel that you are That. To say it in another way: unless you become godly you cannot salute, unless you become a god you cannot be humble, unless you become godly you cannot be innocent. That innocence is expressed through this sutra. Salutations we know. We know about godliness, we know about salutations. But this sutra is very difficult, impossible to conceive of. It makes you godly, and it makes this being godly a basic condition for salutation. For us, we always salute to the higher, higher than us. This sutra makes you the highest, and that the basic condition for salutation. Whom to salute now? You are the highest – now salute to the lowest.
From the lower, the salutation towards the higher is just ordinary. There is nothing in it. It is the ordinary mind working, the political mind, the ambitious mind working to salute to the higher. But when you are the highest, the mind will say, “Now you need not salute anyone. Now the whole existence must salute you. You are the highest; now let the whole world come to you to salute. Now let the whole existence bow down to your feet.”
This will be your feeling. If you take it as you are, if you begin to follow this sutra, this will be the feeling: “Now let the whole world come and salute me.” But this sutra says: this is the basic condition for you to salute the divine.
When you are no one, ego feels starved. When you feel inferiority, you want that someone should salute you. This is a hunger – hunger for food. This shows that you are still just at the first stage of the mind, “I am.” And below this stage there is nothingness, so whatsoever you put in this “I am” goes deep into the abyss, and the “I am” remains always vacant.

One day a seeker came to Mulla Nasruddin to ask him how to find the truth. Nasruddin said, “There are many conditions to be fulfilled before I can accept you as a disciple. So come with me. I am going to the well to fetch some water.”
He went there. On the way he said to the future disciple, “Don’t ask any questions, because I have not accepted you yet as a disciple. When I accept you, you can ask. Just observe. Don’t ask anything. If you ask anything before I am back at my home, you disqualify yourself.”
The future disciple thought, “It is not such a difficult thing, just going to the well, fetching a bucket of water and then coming back. I will remain totally silent.”
So he kept silent. But Mulla was doing such absurd things that it was impossible to keep silent. He had two buckets: one bucket to pull water from the well and another, a bigger one, to fill with water. But the bigger one had no bottom at all, so he would pull the water and throw it into the bigger one with no bottom. The water would go out, then he would drop the bucket again.
So the future disciple said, “What are you doing?”
Mulla said, “Now you disqualify yourself. Now no more questions. Leave me. It is not your business. Who are you to ask me?”
The future disciple said, “I am going. And there is no need to tell me to go because there is no need to stay with you. But some advice – I am leaving, but some advice to you: you can labor on this bucket your whole life and it will never be filled.”
So Mulla said, “I am concerned with the surface, not with the bottom. I am looking at the surface. When the surface is okay, I will go back to my home. To consider the bottom is irrelevant.”
The future disciple left, but in the night he couldn’t sleep. “What type of man is this?” He began to brood and there was no sleep, so he thought about many, many clues: “What is the secret of it?” By and by, he mystified himself. And then he thought, “It may be that he was just examining me, testing me, just seeing whether I can keep silence in a situation where it is impossible to be silent.”
So in the morning he ran back, came to Mulla Nasruddin, and said, “Pardon me, excuse me. I was at fault, it was my fault. I should have kept silent. But what was the secret of it?”
The Mulla said, “Because I am not going to accept you as my disciple I can let you know the secret. The secret is this: that bucket was nothing but the first state of man’s mind. You go on filling it, but it will never be filled. But no one is concerned with the bottom; everyone is concerned with the surface. You go on filling it with prestige, respect, wealth and everything. You are concerned with the surface. One day your ego will be filled. No one is concerned with the bottom, whether this bucket has any bottom at all!”
The disciple began to weep and said, “Accept me. You are the right man.”
Mulla Nasruddin said, “It is too late. This bucket is so helpful to me. Whenever someone turns up with the mind to be a disciple, this bucket disqualifies – anyone! It has disqualified many and it has saved me much labor. Because this bucket will not disqualify a person only if he has come to feel that his mind is a bucket without a bottom. Then he is qualified to be my disciple, because all disciplehood is from ‘I am’ to ‘I am not.’”

If you drop from the bottom to the abyss, to the second layer of the mind, that is what every discipleship is for. Then there is nothingness. And beyond that nothingness is the feeling of “Aham brahmasmi – I am That.”

============================================================

Osho,
“So-aham – I am That,” or “Aham brahmasmi – I am the brahman,” or “Ana'l-haq”: all these statements seem to be that of a gyani, one who is on the path of knowledge. Last night's sutra says: “I am That – so-aham – is the salutation.” The second part seems to be that of a bhakta, one who is on the path of devotion, whereas the first part seems to be that of a gyani. This is a rare combination. Please explain why the statements of gyana and bhakti have been put together.
In this reference, please explain the difference between a gyani and a bhakta.
How do gyanis like Rishi Kapil and Shankara differ from bhaktas such as Chaitanya and Meera?
Why have great bhaktas preferred to keep themselves separate from bhagwan, the divine, such as Meera from Lord Krishna?
Does bhakti culminate into gyana or gyana culminate into bhakti?
The ultimate is one, but it can be viewed from many angles. It can be looked at from various points of view. It is one, but when it is expressed the expression can take multi-shapes. It is one, but when one reaches towards it the paths differ. And whatsoever is said from a particular path is just one aspect of the reality. It is not the total reality.
Experience of the total is possible, but expression of the total is not possible. Expression is always partial. You can feel and realize the total, but the moment you express it, it is only a viewpoint, it is never the total.
There are two basic divisions of approach: the path of knowing and the path of love. Man’s mind is divided between these two aspects. These are not divisions of the ultimate reality: these are divisions of the human mind. The mind can look at the truth as a knower or as a lover. That depends not on the ultimate reality but on you. If you look through a lover’s eyes, then your experience will be the same as when you look through the knower’s eyes, but the expression will differ. When you look through love, your expression will be totally different.
Why this difference? Why this total difference? Because love has its own language. Knowledge has its own language, love has its own language. Those languages are quite contradictory. For example, knowledge always strives towards one, and love is impossible if there are not two. Love is possible only when there is a duality. But I must make haste to say that love is a very mysterious experience: it is oneness between two. The two must be there, but just the two being there doesn’t mean that love is there. When the two begin to feel a deep oneness, then love happens.
So love has a double reality: oneness in two. The duality must be there and at the same time oneness should be felt. And the language of love will retain this duality, because the lover and the beloved, these are the two polarities. Between these two polarities oneness has been felt, but that oneness cannot exist without these two polarities.
The lover will say, “I have become one with my beloved. The beloved is in me.” But he cannot speak the language of knowledge, he cannot say that duality has disappeared. He can only say that duality has become illusory: “We are two and yet we are not two.” This paradox, “We are two, yet we are not two,” is love’s language. It is not mathematical; it cannot be. It is the language of feeling.
You can feel oneness without becoming one. There is no need to become one; that is irrelevant. You can feel oneness without merging, without dissolving. You can remain two outwardly, inwardly you can become one. And the path of devotion, the path of love, says that if oneness means dissolution of the two, that oneness will be just flat. That oneness will have no poetry in it, that oneness will be dry. It will be a mathematical oneness.
Love says that oneness is more alive. It is not a mathematical unity. The lover and beloved remain, and yet they begin to feel they have dissolved. The twoness remains, but it becomes more and more illusory. Oneness is felt as more real than twoness, but twoness remains.
The seeker on the path of love says that this is the beauty, and the experience is richer for it. A mathematical unity means the experience is not a rich one. In a flat way, two things have disappeared and there is one. It is less mystic. Lovers say, “We remain two and yet we are not two,” and they go on talking in terms of this nonduality in duality, oneness in twoness. The oneness is basic, but on the surface the beloved is the beloved and the lover is the lover and there is a gap. Deep down, the gap has disappeared.
Love is a poetic approach towards existence, and minds differ.
I remember one anecdote about a British scientist, a Nobel prizewinner, Dirac. A friend of Dirac’s – another scientist, a Russian scientist, Kapitsa – gave him one of the most highly praised novels of Dostoyevsky, Crime and Punishment. Kapitsa said to Dirac, “Go through this novel and then tell me your impression.”
When Dirac returned the book he said, “It is nice, but there is one fault, one error in the book. The writer says that the sun rises twice in the same day – on the same day the sun rises twice.” In the story somewhere Dostoyevsky has made the error: the sun rises twice on the same day in the novel. So Dirac said, “That is the only error, and I have nothing more to say.”
This was the only thing he said about Dostoyevsky’s great novel, Crime and Punishment, and he is no ordinary man. But the approach, the approach of a mathematician, it is not the approach of a poet, of an artist, of a lover. It is the approach of an impartial observer, mathematical. Only this he had to say, “There is one error: the sun cannot rise twice in the same day.” About such a great creation, such a great piece of art, Crime and Punishment, only this struck his mind.
Why? The training of the mind, impartial observation, mathematical observation… No one had ever detected this error. He was the first man. Many have felt a deep insight in Dostoyevsky’s book, a depth psychology, a great poetry, a great drama, but no one has detected this error.
It depends on how you look at the world. A lover looks with different eyes. When the lover comes to the ultimate experience, he knows now everything has become one. But he says that if this oneness is simply oneness, just oneness, it is dead. It is an alive oneness, it is an alive, dynamic phenomenon. It is a constant movement between the two shores. It is a constant unity, a movement, a live process. It is not a dead unity. And reality can be looked at with quite contradictory outlooks.
The mathematical mind, the mind of an observer, a detached observer – that is the path of knowledge, knowing – he will say either the duality exists or oneness, but both together are impossible. This is a logical approach: “How can you say that oneness exists while two are still there? Either dissolve the two, then there is oneness; or don’t talk of oneness, talk of two.” And he is right also in his own way. It is his approach.
He says, “Either you have achieved oneness…then there is neither the lover nor the beloved. Both have disappeared. There is no distinction. You cannot talk about the beloved, of the divine. You cannot talk of the devotee. It is nonsense. Stop! Or, if you are still continuing to talk in terms of duality, then you have not come to oneness – because both cannot exist simultaneously.”
This is just a mathematical approach. But mathematics is not life, and life allows even the opposite, even the contradictory. So I will explain it in a different way. It will be easier.
This century has seen one of the greatest revolutions in science, and that is the dethronement of mathematics. With the discovery of the electron, the old rationalistic approach became absurd, out of date.

You might have heard about Immanuel Kant, a German philosopher. He had two cats. One was a smaller one, the other was a bigger one, and both the cats would sleep with him. But there was a difficulty. Sometimes they would not come in time, and Kant was very particular about time. He would move just by the clock. So he would have to wait for the cats; only then could he lock the door.
So one day he called his servant and told him, “Bring a carpenter and make two holes in the door – one for the smaller cat and one for the bigger one – so they can come at any time and I can go to sleep easily.”
The servant thought him mad, crazy, because the cats could come through just one hole. There was no need for two. But mathematically Kant is right; practically he is just foolish. Mathematically he is absolutely right. But the servant thought that one hole would do, so one hole was made.
When Kant came back from his university, he saw that there was only one hole, for the bigger one, so he said, “From where will my small cat get in? Where is the other hole?”
The servant said, “She can get in through this hole. She is not such a big philosopher. Cats are very practical, they are not theoretical, so don’t you bother.”
But it was inconceivable for Kant, so he waited. When he saw with his own eyes that both cats were coming through one hole, then only was he at ease.

We can laugh at this, but a more crazy thing has happened now. With the discovery of the electron, everything has become muddled in physics – because one electron thrown at a screen, shot at a screen, with two holes will pass through both the holes simultaneously. One electron shot at a screen with two holes will pass through both the holes simultaneously. One electron should pass through one hole. If you are thrown out of the window you cannot pass through two windows simultaneously, but an electron does.
When for the first time this was observed, the electron seemed absolutely impractical. And the whole thing seems weird. How can one electron pass through two holes simultaneously? But it does, and electrons are not philosophers. So what to do and how to interpret this phenomenon?
Science had to develop a new concept. Now they say the electron is both a particle and a wave. So when you throw it at a screen, it passes through two holes simultaneously – because a wave can pass through two holes simultaneously, not a particle. A wave can pass through two holes simultaneously, but a particle cannot. When you look at it, it is a particle, but it behaves as a wave.
Now old mathematics, old geometry, the old Euclid, will not be ready to concede this, because a wave is not a particle and a particle is not a wave. A point is not a line and a line is not a point. So they had to throw out the whole Euclidian geometry and now they say, “We cannot force mathematics on reality. We will have to change our mathematics; there is no other way. If reality behaves nonmathematically, we cannot say to reality, ‘Behave mathematically, behave logically.’”
Physics has discovered a very weird world where all our laws are blurred. It is both. If you observe it, it appears as a particle, as a point. If you observe its behavior, it appears as a wave, as a line.
The same has happened with the ultimate truth. If you look at it through love’s eyes, it behaves like a wave. If you look at it through a knower’s eyes, it appears to be a particle. Through a knower’s eyes it appears to be one, and through a lover’s eyes it appears to be two. It depends on the onlooker: it is both and it is neither.
Because of this, if one goes on emphasizing one’s own standpoint too much, then that standpoint will look contradictory to the other. If someone says, “The electron is a particle, I have observed it myself,” he is right, nothing is wrong, but then he will exclude the other. Then the other becomes wrong by itself. If he says, “Because I am right, then you are wrong. Because I have observed the electron to be a particle, it cannot be a wave,” then you are rejected outright. Then there is contradiction.
And the same can be done by the other who has observed it behaving as a wave, who has seen it with his own eyes passing through two holes simultaneously. He will say, “It is not a particle at all, because a particle cannot behave like a wave.” Then they go on insisting. Then they create sects, exclusive sects.
This sutra is rare – it combines both. It says: When you know you are That, this is the salutation. The first part belongs to the path of knowledge and the second part to the path of devotion, to the path of love. This is to say, in other words, that when you know that you are one, only then do you know that you are two. Or, when you come to know that you are two, you can feel the inner unity, the oneness.
This twoness and oneness belongs to you, not to reality. Reality is both or neither. Before a lover’s eyes it behaves like two; it is divided between the lover and the beloved. Before the knower’s eyes it behaves as a particle, one. There is no contradiction, real contradiction, but they will laugh at each other. The seekers on the path of knowledge will always feel that the devotee is missing something, he cannot achieve the ultimate. And they are right in a way, because from their standpoint this is so.
I will tell you one story. I have heard:

One day, just in the morning, the sun is yet to arise, one earthworm, half-awake, still sleepy, is just relaxing around a stone. Then the sun begins to rise, the mist disappears, and this earthworm feels the presence of some other earthworm. He looks around the stone. Just by the other side, another earthworm is approaching. He falls in love, as it is the habit of men and earthworms to fall in love at first sight. And when the preliminaries of courtship are over, the first earthworm says to the other, “Baby, I am in deep love. And now I cannot live without you, so marry me.”
The other has remained silent up to now. Now the other laughs and says, “You fool, I am your other end!”

On the path of knowledge, devotees look foolish. They are talking to their own other end. They are calling, “Beloved. God! Divine!” but they are talking to their own other end. They look foolish. But they are good people – they accept it.
Saint. Francis is reported to have always called himself “God’s fool.” They are good people – they can laugh at themselves. Saint. Francis says, “I am a fool, but let me be a fool. I don’t want to be wise because I have seen wise ones. I may be mad, but let me be mad. This love between me and the divine is enough.”
Devotees are fools, but with a method. They are mad, but with a method. They say, “This madness is the only wisdom possible. If you cannot love yourself, you cannot love. Let it be the other end, but love is so good and love is so beautiful that even if one has to divide oneself in two for love, one should divide.”
That’s why bhaktas, devotees, lovers, have said, “This world is a play, a leela. Radha is also Krishna – disguised. the divine loving itself through so many disguises.” So bhaktas, devotees, are not very serious. They say, “We are fools, we are mad people, but we are happy about it. And we don’t want your knowledge – dry, dead. Of course, it is exact, but dry and dead. Our madness is alive.”
Those who are on the path of knowledge, for them love is inconceivable because they say, “If you love you cannot know, because love gives partiality. You cannot be detached. A seeker must be detached; he must not be involved. He must stand aloof, indifferent. He must observe as an outsider. He must not be in the process himself.”
A lover cannot be detached. You cannot ask Majnu to be detached about Laila; that is impossible. He will say Laila is the only beautiful woman, not only of this time but of all times. This is absurd, but he is in love. Love creates this feeling. He is authentic – whatsoever he is saying he feels, but this feeling is that of an involved man, committed. He is not an outsider. He cannot look at Laila detachedly.
So the followers of the path of knowledge will say, “Majnu can never come to truth. He will always live in his own illusions. Whatsoever he is saying is a subjective feeling. It is not objective truth.” They will say, “Bhaktas go on talking about their own illusions. If you want reality, then be objective. Then love will not do. Really, love is the hindrance, because it colors everything.”
In Sanskrit, we have the word rag. Rag means attachment and rag means color. Every attachment gives a color to the object. It is a projection. The path of knowledge says, “Be absolutely unattached – veetrag, no attachment, no love, no thought of devotion – only then can you come to the real.”
This dialogue can continue infinitely, because on every point they will differ. And I would insist they are right as far as they are concerned. Whatsoever they say about themselves is right, but they become wrong when they begin to say something about the other. When these followers of knowledge say something about the devotees, it becomes wrong because that is not their experience at all. Whatsoever they know of love is one thing. Whatsoever a devotee comes to know of love is absolutely different.
For the devotee, for the path of love, it is not a projection because the lover says, “I am no more. Who can project? I have no expectations, no demands, no desires, so how can one project without desires, without expectations, without ambitions?” The bhakta says, “I have nullified myself just to become a space for the divine to descend, and now the divine has entered.”
This love, this communion, is not a projection, because projection is always through desires. So if you are desiring something by your communion, it will be a projection. If you simply desire communion and nothing else, it cannot be a projection. So bhaktas have said, “We don’t want your moksha. Baikunth, heaven, we don’t want. We don’t want any punya, any merit. We don’t want your heaven, we only want you!”
And bhaktas say, “Those who are following the path of knowledge, they want liberation, they want moksha, they desire heaven, they desire purity, they desire freedom. Their effort is ambitious.” Bhaktas say, “If baikunth is there, heaven is there, and your feet are here, we will choose your feet.” They have never asked about moksha, liberation, freedom – nothing.
One bhakta has sung, “Let me be a dog in Vrindavan, or let me be just dust in the streets of Vrindavan. That’s enough. And I will wait for your feet for eternity – nothing else.”
Really, in a deeper way, bhaktas seem to be less ambitious than gyanis. But they cannot understand each other; that is difficult. You cannot make them understand. The dialogue seems impossible because they use different languages, they use different realms, they give different meaning to their words. Bhaktas say that love is the only freedom. For the path of knowledge, knowledge is freedom, not love. Love is a bondage, because the moment you are in love you are in a bondage. And the bhaktas say love is freedom, and if you know that love is bondage you have not known love at all. So they are talking in different languages and there is no meeting.
Only sometimes, rarely does it happen, that a person is both. It is a very rare phenomenon. Centuries and centuries pass…only then does someone happen to be both. But then his language will become more difficult for you to understand. Because look at this: a bhakta cannot understand the language of a gyani; a gyani cannot understand the language of a bhakta; but if a person is both, the masses will not understand him at all. In itself each language is difficult. And when both languages become one within someone, it becomes impossible to understand him.
That man can understand both the bhaktas and the gyanis, but the masses cannot understand him at all because he will appear to continuously contradict himself. Whenever he speaks the language of the path of knowledge he will say one thing, and whenever he speaks the language of love he will speak in contradictory, absolutely contradictory terms. He will go on contradicting himself, and you will simply be confused. What does he mean? This is rare, and whenever it happens that man is misunderstood completely.
This Upanishad belongs to such a man who is both. You may not have noticed, but the very name of the Upanishad is Atma Pooja – worship of the self. It is absurd – the title is absurd, contradictory. Worship of your self? Worship is always of someone else! Worship of your self: so you are the worshiper and you are the worshiped. Worship loses all meaning.
And he is continuously speaking in paradoxes. Every sentence belongs to both. He will use the symbols of the bhaktas and then will give the meaning of the knowers, not of the lovers. The whole Upanishad is doing this consistently. The symbology is of devotees, worship, but the meaning given to it is that of the knowers.
In this sutra also the same is the case: if you know you are That, this is the salutation. Because of this consistently inconsistent attitude, consistently contradicting himself and using double language, mixing two different realms, this Upanishad was neglected. No one has commented upon it. It is one of the most neglected Upanishads, and one of the most beautiful ones.
To comment on it will be difficult, because commentators are again of two types. Those who believe in the path of knowledge, for them the whole language is of the other camp. And the followers of the path of love, for them the whole meaning belongs to the other camp. So this rishi of the Atma Pooja Upanishad really belongs to no camp. And because of this, this Upanishad has remained neglected, uncommented upon.
So the first thing: these are two languages. Love has its own language, knowledge has its own language. And they cannot meet superficially. They can meet only in a person, not in a dialogue. One person can attain such a state, but this happens rarely. And why rarely? Because when you have come to the goal by one path, who bothers about the other paths? There is no need. You have reached the goal by one path.
Ramakrishna tried this. He was the only experiment in this age. He would reach to a particular state of consciousness and then he would stop. Then he would begin to travel by another path, then by another. And he would stop only when he reached to the same state by so many paths. He tried Sufi ways, he tried Buddhist meditation, he tried Hindu paths. He tried…. Deeply he was a devotee, basically he was on the path of love, but then he tried Vedanta, the path of knowledge. It was very arduous, because it is not so easy to change from being a devotee to the path of knowledge. Then everything has to be contradicted.
He was learning with Totapuri, one of the greatest Vedantins of his time. And Totapuri was absolutely a Vedantist, a follower of the path of knowledge. So he would laugh at Ramakrishna and would say, “You are foolish! What are you doing with this weeping, crying, dancing, praying? There is no one. To whom are you praying?’
Then Ramakrishna became a disciple. And this is one of the rarest phenomena, because Ramakrishna had achieved whatsoever Totapuri had achieved. This is humbleness. He became a disciple of Totapuri and he said, “Teach me now. By your path I will travel.”
Totapuri became the teacher, and he was a very rough teacher, a taskmaster. And he would teach him in the same way as he would teach anyone else, from ABC. So Ramakrishna was in a mess because Totapuri would say, “Throw this image of your goddess Kali. Throw this, destroy this. Cut it into pieces!” Ramakrishna would begin to weep. Then Totapuri would say, “This childishness won’t do.”
So one day Ramakrishna said, “It is difficult – it is impossible. Whenever I close my eyes, the goddess is there and I am bowing down to her divine feet. You go on telling me, ‘Throw, cut, destroy!’ How can I do it? How can I destroy the divine image? It is so beautiful and the experience is so lovely and I am in such a high state of mind. I am not in this world at all.”
Totapuri said, “This is all illusion, your projections. Take a sword in your hand and cut the goddess in two. Kill her.”
So Ramakrishna said, “From where can I get the sword?”
Totapuri said, “From the same source where you got this image. From where have you got this image inside? Imagination – so get one sword through imagination. And if you are not going to destroy this, I am going to leave. You have taken a vow to follow me, to be my disciple, so do whatsoever is told; otherwise I leave this very moment.”
So Ramakrishna closes his eyes. He is weeping, tears are falling down, and Totapuri is laughing and saying, “What foolish things you are doing! Why are you weeping? No one can reach truth through weeping. Be a man and kill the goddess.”
And then he brings a piece of glass, Totapuri brings a piece of glass, and he cuts Ramakrishna’s forehead with that glass. Blood begins to flow. And then he says, “As I am cutting your forehead, just inside cut the image.”
And Ramakrishna destroyed the image. This was very arduous. No bhakta has ever done this. This was the first time. But no bhakta will travel this path. There is no need.
And then Ramakrishna said, “The last barrier has fallen away.” That was the last barrier on the path of knowledge.
So Totapuri was at ease, happy, and he said, “You have achieved. Now you are liberated.”
And the next day Ramakrishna is in Kali’s temple, and weeping. He himself has said that the last barrier has fallen, and now again he is weeping and crying and dancing.
Then Totapuri leaves and he says, “You are incurable.”
But this was not a case of incurability. He was just trying to reach to the same point by so many paths. He became a Mohammedan for six months. Then he would not enter the Kali temple, because how can a Mohammedan enter? So he would come just outside; he would inquire about his goddess, “How is she?” and then he would go back. Then he would sleep in a mosque and he would do Sufi methods. For six months he was a Mohammedan.
Then, one day, he came laughing into the temple and he said, “Now I am back. Mother, I am back! I have reached to the same through Mohammedan methods.”
Sometimes only, this has been done. This Upanishad belongs to someone who knew both, and knew deeply. So he goes on changing his track from one language to the other. And those languages are contradictory. If you understand this, then there will be no confusion.

Osho,
You said that life exists in polar opposites – birth and death, good and evil, peace and violence, kindness and cruelty, beauty and ugliness. It seems that these polar opposites are inevitable and are bound to be there. Then what do we strive for through religion? Then what is meant by spiritual transformation?
Saints and prophets try to create a spiritual society and culture. Does it not mean that they want to change the natural state of things? And if we succeed in creating a healthy spiritual society, then what will be the situation of the other polar opposites like cruelty, violence and ugliness?
This is one of the most significant problems, and much confusion exists about it. So first, know it well that religion is not ethics, religion is not morality. Morality goes on endeavoring against that which is evil, bad, immoral, that which is sin. So morality is a conflict, a struggle, against that which is evil. Morality is trying to create a moral world where no immorality should exist. That is impossible.
You can only change, but the balance remains the same – because this is one of the deepest laws of nature, that it exists as polar opposites. If you destroy one, the opposite will also be destroyed. In a world where there is nothing bad, nothing will be good. Where there is no sinner, there will be no saint. The saint exists as a polar opposite to the sinner; they are interdependent.
So moral effort cannot create a world where only good exists. This is a hope, unfulfilled, and it will remain unfulfilled. It cannot come to happen because it is denying the basic law.
Now physicists say matter exists only because there exists something like anti-matter. A parallel world of anti-matter exists. Nature is a balance; you cannot destroy the balance. If you go on emphasizing one polar opposite, really, two things are possible. Either you will be able to make it stronger, then the other polar opposites will become stronger; or you may be able to destroy the other, then the one you were trying to make stronger will be destroyed.
Life is a balance, so morality is a futile effort. When I say this, I don’t mean don’t be moral. I don’t mean don’t be moral, because then again you destroy the balance. Be whatsoever you can be.
Religion is a totally different realm, so religion is not after creating a good world against the bad. Religion is after a balanced world, not against anything. Where good and bad balance, they negate each other. And the man who is neither a saint nor a sinner, this man becomes a sage. This is a balanced person: neither a sinner nor a saint, just a deep balance, an inner balance, between the polar opposite forces.
When two polar opposites are balanced, you transcend them. Look at it in this way. Sometimes you feel you are healthy: this is an imbalance. Sometimes you feel that you are ill: this is again an imbalance. Sometimes you don’t feel yourself either ill or healthy: this is a balance. To feel that you are healthy, it means you have moved to the other extreme. Now you will fall ill.
Remember this: whenever you begin to feel you are healthy, you are on the verge – you will fall ill. This happens every day but you are not aware of it. Whenever you feel, “I am happy,” happiness ends. Whenever you become aware of anything, it means you have moved very far. Now come back – balance must be regained. And to regain the balance you will have to move to the opposite.
It is just like a nata, an acrobat, walking on a rope. He is continuously moving from left to right. But have you observed: whenever he has moved too much to the left, then suddenly he will have to move to the right – to balance. When he feels now he will fall if he goes further to the left, to balance this he will have to move to the right.
We are all natas, acrobats, moving on a rope continuously – from good to bad, from bad to good, from health to illness, and illness to health – continuously. A sage is one who has come down from the rope. Now he is not bothered about going from left to right, he has gone beyond.
Religion is a transcendence. Knowing this, that the bad cannot be destroyed because it is a balance, that the good cannot remain alone…they are both necessary. Through these polar opposites, existence exists. Seeing this, realizing this, the sage simply balances himself between the two. There is no choice. He is not choosing good against bad. If you choose good against bad, sooner or later you will have to choose bad against good, because you have moved in one direction. Now you will have to move in the other.
So saints are always moving towards sin, and sinners are always moving towards sainthood. Saints have their sin moments and sinners have their saint moments. In each saint the sinner exists as a possibility, and whenever the saintliness is too much, the sinner brings the balance. So they say – those who know, they say – you cannot be a saint twenty-four hours a day. You have to have some holiday. You cannot be. It is too much. Then it is boring and heavy and one has to escape. So saints have their own tricks to escape from their sainthood.
You cannot be a full-time sinner. It is difficult, impossible. You will fall down, you will die. You will have to move. So it happens that sometimes sinners will do such saintly acts that you cannot even conceive saints doing them. Sometimes sinners are so saintlike that it seems unbelievable. But they balance.
Religion is not concerned with good and bad, with choice. Religion is a choiceless transcendence. Realizing this polarity of existence, the sage, the one who knows this polarity, just leaves choosing. Then he never moves to the right, never to the left. He remains in between. Buddha has called this majjhim nikaya, the middle path. Buddha says, “I will not choose. I will remain in the middle, just exactly in the middle.”
When you don’t choose, you transcend.
It is possible – it may be, it may not be, but it is possible – a world is possible in which we have transcended this constant wavering between right and left, between sinner and saint, between good and evil, and the whole world is balanced. That will be a religious world. It will not be moral, it will not be immoral. It will be religious.
So this constant confusion between religion and morality must be discarded. Religion is not morality. Morality is a choice against something and for something.
I will tell you a story:

Once Mulla Nasruddin was a listener to a very learned scholar. He was listening to him. The scholar was a religious man, a great religious teacher also. So in the end, when the discourse was just over, the religious scholar asked everyone present, “Raise your hands those who want to go to heaven?” So everyone raised his hand except Mulla Nasruddin, and he was sitting just in the front row.
This was happening for the first time. This teacher has asked the same question in many villages, many cities and towns, and never has he seen anyone just sitting there without raising his hand for heaven. So for the first time he had to ask the other question. He had never asked this, but he asked, “Those who want to go to hell, now they should raise their hands.”
No one raised a hand, not even Mulla Nasruddin. Then the scholar asked, “Are you hearing me? Are you deaf? Where do you want to go? I asked for heaven – you remained silent. I asked for hell – you remained silent. Where do you want to go?”
Mulla Nasruddin said, “Just in between. I don’t want to go anywhere. Not to heaven, because I have seen those who go to heaven fall down into hell. I don’t choose hell either, because from hell where can you go? You can only go to heaven. So please allow me, if it is possible, to be just in between. Only then can I be at peace, otherwise it is impossible. In heaven, hell becomes an attraction. In hell one is hankering after heaven. So if it is possible, allow me to be in between.”

This is the attitude of no choice. Religion is no choice, choicelessness. But we go on thinking in terms of morality and confusing it with religion. Morality is a day-to-day necessity, and through morality you have not been able to create a moral world. Really, the more man becomes conscious of morality, the more immorality is found. Everyone talks about the fact that the world has become immoral. The real case is this, that you have become too morality conscious. The world has not gone immoral, man has become too conscious of morality. That’s why the world looks so immoral. It is a balance.
Now we are condemning war everywhere. Now war looks like total immorality. But are you aware that never in history, never before, have we condemned wars? We have fought them, we have never condemned them. For the first time we are condemning war and we are creating atom bombs. We never condemned war because we never created atom bombs. They create a balance. The more fatal, suicidal war becomes, the more we will be against wars. The more we are against, the more fatal war will become.
So whatsoever you deny you also create. The world was never so poor – when I say this I mean that the world was never so conscious of poverty. It has always been poor, more poor than it is now. The world has always been poorer. The further back we move, the poorer a world we find. But poverty was taken for granted; it was not immoral. Now to be rich is immoral. One feels guilty, and the poor man by your side is your sin. For the first time we have become so moralistic that to be rich is guilt-creating, and to have poverty around is a sin committed by you.
This is one thing: too much consciousness, too much awareness, too much morality.
And then, simultaneously, the poorer have become more poor. Economically they are not, but now they feel poverty heavy on them. So whatsoever we do it goes in two directions simultaneously, it develops, and a balance is always achieved.
Religion is not for a richer world, because a richer world can exist only with a deep poverty, great poverty, in every dimension. You can change circumstances, you can change names, and then again the same thing will become apparent with a new face.
Religion is for a balanced world, neither rich nor poor. Try to understand this: neither rich nor poor, a balanced world – where no one is conscious of poverty, no one is conscious of richness. That’s why a religious world is a very difficult affair. It seems to be the impossible revolution.
These polar opposites are there and they will always be there. All that you can do is to go beyond them.
Look at it, for example, from some other direction. Man has been fighting with death continuously. The whole history of science is nothing but a fight against death. The history of medicine, the history of the human mind, is a fight against death. Now we have prolonged life. Man is living the longest now, but no human society was so much afraid of death as we are afraid of death. Now, in the West, they have achieved the longest life on earth.
We hear, and we go on saying, that in the old, golden days man lived to be a hundred. That is not fact, a simple fiction, but it has a reality behind it. Everyone felt that he had lived a hundred years, because no one ever counted. Counting is a new thing, birthday is a new thing. But remember, when you remember a birthday, then the deathday will be continuously before you.
No animal is afraid of death because no animal is aware of birth. Primitive societies are not afraid of death, but they are not aware of birth either. Death happens as birth happens, and there is no counting how long you have lived. The more precise your counting becomes, the more afraid you become of death.
Now America is in the grip of death; everyone is, but America is more in the grip of death because time consciousness has come to a peak. Everyone is aware. The longer life becomes possible, the more black death becomes. Why? It is a deep balance. If you go on prolonging life, you are prolonging your death also. If you live long, your death will also be a long, spread out affair. Both grow continuously and simultaneously. You cannot escape – you cannot choose.
Really, we have found every possibility for fighting diseases. But man is ill, more ill than ever. With all the scientific growth in medicine, man is ill more than ever. Why? Why does your progress in medicine also create somewhere a progress in illnesses, in diseases?
Carl Gustav Jung proposed a very fantastic idea. He called it synchronicity. He said whatsoever is being done, there is also a parallel world growing. And you cannot do anything. If knowledge grows, ignorance will deepen. If health grows, illnesses will explode. If you become good, somewhere someone may become bad. And nothing is wrong about it: it is simply a balance. The world cannot exist with good people only. It will be such a boring world. Can you conceive a world of only mahatmas? The whole world will commit suicide, because even to exist for a single day will be such a tedious affair. All around mahatmas! – you will simply die of them.
No, life is a constant polarity. The richness comes from the polar opposites. They exist together.
Religion is not a choosing between these two. Religion is just understanding this polarity, and then remaining in a nonchoosing attitude. A religious man lives without choosing. If he is healthy, he is healthy. If he is ill, he is ill. When he is ill, he is at ease with his illness. He is not longing for health. When he is healthy, he is at ease with his health. He is not conscious of it. He moves easily between these polar opposites without any choice. And, by and by, these movements are slowed down. They become shorter and shorter and shorter, and a moment comes when there is no wavering.
This nonwavering comes through nonchoosing. If you choose, you will waver. If you choose, you will create the opposite. This looks very paradoxical, but I would like to say: don’t try to be good, otherwise you will be bad. Don’t try to be something, otherwise you will become quite the contrary. Just remain in a nonchoosing attitude. Whatsoever happens, let it happen, allow it to happen.
This is very difficult. If anger happens, allow it to happen –don’t choose. If love happens, allow it to happen – don’t choose. And soon a day will come when neither love will happen nor anger will happen. If you choose, then you are in the grip, then you are in the wheel, and then the grip is automatic. Then you go on changing from one to the other, and this is a constant, repetitive process. The whole life becomes just wavering from one point to another. Don’t be an acrobat on the rope – just come down.
Look at it in this way: you are walking on the ground. You can walk even on a very narrow strip. We can make a chalk strip, a white strip on the ground. You can walk on it without any movement to right and left. Why? Now the same strip is stretched between two houses’ roofs. Now walk on it! You cannot walk. Why? The same strip on the ground you can walk very easily balanced, but the same strip, the same size, hanging between two roofs – now you cannot walk a single step. You begin to waver. Why?
Now you have become aware you may fall down. Now you have chosen not to fall down. Now you have chosen something. Now you are not walking at ease. It is a choice not to fall down. You have chosen. Because of this choice, every step is toward falling down, so you will have to move right and left to balance.
Life is just a rope, a very narrow rope. If you choose, you have chosen wavering. Neither good nor bad – that is the only good. Neither this nor that – this is the only religion. The Upanishads have said: Neti, neti – not this, not that. We don’t choose. It is an effortless understanding. It is simple understanding.

Osho,
In neo-sannyas, what are you doing – balancing the present irreligious state of the world or are you creating another opposite pole?
No opposite pole is to be created because neo-sannyas is not a choice. It is not against the world. If sannyas is against the world, it is a choice; then, if your sannyas is against the world, you will create a very worldly society. We have done this in India. These five thousand years in India were a conscious choice for sannyas, renunciation. Renunciation was the goal. And look at the Indian mind: the most worldly in the whole world. Why? We have tried to create an absolutely unattached society, and look at the Indian mind – the greediest. We have been saying, “Wealth means nothing. It is simply mud! Nothing!” And look at our society: wealth is everything.
Why did this happen? This was a conscious choice. We were against the world. Through that conscious choice, we moved to the other extreme. So now we go on talking against the world and we go on being worldly.
The same in the reverse order will become possible in the West. They have chosen the world, and now their children are going against the world, against society, against the establishment, against whatsoever has been held as valuable. America stood for wealth, and now their children are hippies, they are against wealth. America was a clean society, cleanliness was held just next to godliness, and now hippies are just going against this – the most unclean.
Why? When you choose, something will happen to balance. If you choose wealth, your children will be against wealth. If you choose some other world, your children will belong to this world, they will choose this world.
Neo-sannyas is not a choice. It is a deep acceptance, not a choice. It is not against, neither is it for. It is a deep understanding, remaining in between. Not choosing – living; not choosing – flowing. If you can flow with a deep acceptance inside, sooner or later the day will come when you will transcend both. To me, sannyas means not renunciation but transcendence.