---
title: The Guest 01
series: The Guest 01-15
talk_number: 1
url: https://oshoworld.com/the-guest-01
language: English
duration: 01:43:22
author: KABIR
scraped_at: 2026-01-03T09:28:24.898715+00:00
---
When my friend is away from me, I am depressed;
nothing in the daylight delights me,
sleep at night gives no rest,
who can I tell about this?

The night is dark and long…hours go by…
because I am alone, I sit up suddenly,
fear goes through me…

Kabir says: listen, my friend
there is one thing in the world that satisfies,
and that is a meeting with the guest.
Man is not what he is. Man has become what he is not. That’s the root cause of his misery. He has gone astray from his being, he has become too involved in becoming.
“To become” means to become false, “to become” means to become that which you are not. “To be” is already the case. Man has not to become anything other than he is, he has to relax in his being and know the truth.
The truth is already given, the truth is not somewhere in the future. It is not a goal, but the source. You are coming from truth. If you can find the source again, you will know what truth is. You are not going toward truth: all going takes you further and further away from truth.
You must have heard the name of Radha. Mythologically, she is known to be the most beloved woman of Krishna. He had many lovers; Radha was the suprememost. But historically, there has never been a woman by the name of Radha, and in the ancient scriptures her name is not mentioned. It is an invention of later mystics, later sages, and that has tremendous significance; it will be good to understand it.
In Sanskrit there is a word, dhara, which means the flow of a river moving from its source toward the ocean. If you reverse the word dhara, it becomes radha. Radha means the flow of a river moving toward its origin, not toward the ocean; radha is a metaphor. And one can be a beloved of God only if one turns the whole process of life from moving toward the goal to going deeper and deeper down toward the source – from being a dhara, one becomes a radha. And the source is within you. The goal is without, the source is within. The source is your very being.
But the mind is aggressive – it wants to explore, it wants to go on adventures. It wants to know that which is not known, it wants to demystify existence, it wants to conquer – it is on a journey of conquest. The mind is basically masculine, and through the mind there is no way toward godliness.
One has to become feminine. One has to become receptive rather than aggressive. One has to learn the art of relaxation rather than learning strategies to conquer the world and reality. Truth is not going to be a conquest, it is going to be a total surrender. One has to become a host, one has to open up, one has to be just a receptivity – so the wind can come in, so the rain can come in, so the sun can come in. And one day, just hiding behind the sun and the rain and the wind, comes the guest. The guest does not come from the outside, he arises within you. God is the guest.
But you have to be a host first, you have to learn the art of being a host. You have to become a welcome, you have to become a prayer, you have to become an invitation; you have to become a waiting, an infinite waiting. If it takes ages for him to come, you have to wait, with tears in your eyes of course, but with tremendous trust in your heart.
Kabir calls God the guest because he wants the seeker to be the host. The masculine mind cannot become the host. The masculine mind can only become an aggressor; it knows how to snatch things away. The masculine mind is a doer, a great doer; hence the masculine mind gives birth to science – science is basically male.
Religion is female, and those who want to enter the world of religion have to understand this very deeply because it is fundamental. If you miss this point, you will miss it all: you have to become feminine. And when I say “feminine,” I don’t mean biologically; it is not a question of man and woman, it is not a question of physiology – it is a question of your psychology. You can have the body of a woman and yet your psychology is masculine.
That’s what is happening now: many women are turning masculine, becoming more aggressive. In the name of liberation they are losing something infinitely valuable. They are losing contact with the sacred, exchanging it for the mundane. Women have always been connected in a subtle way with the sacred. Women have been mankind’s contact with the divine, but now they are becoming more and more masculine. It is not a question of physiology or biology: remember, you can have the body of a man, but a psychology that I call feminine, receptive. Buddha is feminine if you look at his psychology; Jesus is feminine if you look at his.
Friedrich Nietzsche was the first to point out that Buddha and Jesus are womanish. He was being critical of course, he was not appreciating the fact, but he was the first to point it out; he had that intuitive genius. He would have become a buddha himself, but he used his genius in the wrong way; he used his talents in a very destructive way and released the greatest destructive force seen on earth up until now.
Fascism, Nazism, are nothing but offshoots of Nietzsche’s mind. He was very masculine, he appreciated the masculine mind. He appreciated the soldier not the sannyasin; war not love; swords not flowers; destruction, murder, conquest. He did not appreciate the beauty of surrender, trust, love, friendship; he did not appreciate compassion, ecstasy, celebration – no, those were not his values. Hence he criticized Buddha and Jesus, more particularly Jesus; when he said Jesus was feminine he was condemning him.
I also say Jesus is feminine, but I am not condemning him – I could not appreciate him more. To say Jesus and Buddha are feminine is the greatest appreciation possible because they have become hosts; they have become open, vulnerable to existence. They have sent the invitation and they are simply waiting.
The way of Buddha is meditation, the way of Jesus is prayer. But these are simply different names for the same phenomenon. Meditation means becoming silent, utterly silent, becoming a no-mind; and prayer also means becoming a deep listening. What you think is prayer, is not prayer. You think saying something to God is prayer? It is not prayer at all. What can you say to God; what have you to say to God? Real prayer begins only when you start listening to God, when you become just a listening, utterly silent: then meditation and prayer become very close. Meditation is silence, and prayer too is silence, they are just different names for the same phenomenon.
Jesus and Buddha are feminine, and that’s what Kabir wants you to understand and to be. Kabir says of himself, “I am a woman married to God, God is my lover. I am fortunate that he has chosen me as his wife, as his beloved.” He sings many songs in which he says, “Ram ki dulhaniya – I am wedded to Rama, I am wedded to God.” In his simple poetry, Kabir is giving you tremendously important insights.
The first thing to be understood is that “becoming” is driving you crazy. You are not to become anything, you are already that. You have to accept yourself and relax into that acceptance. The person who is trying to become something is bound to remain tense, naturally: the constant fear of whether he is going to make it or not, whether what he is doing is going to lead him to the goal or not, whether he has chosen the right path or not; the constant fear of whether he is doing enough to achieve or not, whether or not there are others who may reach before him. Becoming creates fear, becoming creates competition, and becoming drives you crazy, neurotic. Becoming takes you further and further away from your being.
Do not become. Be, just be. Becoming is the root cause of all confusion, misery, and anguish: confusion because you cannot in fact become that which you are not. The rose can try as much as possible, but it is going to remain a rose, it can’t become a lotus. The lotus can try hard, can practice all kinds of yoga exercises, but the lotus is going to remain a lotus, it can’t become a rose. A rose is a rose, and a lotus is a lotus. But the lotus is beautiful, and the rose is beautiful. There is no confusion because the rose is perfectly happy in being a rose, and the lotus is perfectly happy in being a lotus. Only man is miserable.
Man is the only being on earth that is miserable because he is not happy in being himself; he wants to become something else. We have been brought up with this poison: “Become.” We have been driven by society, by the church, by parents, by teachers: “Become.” Nobody says to us, “Be.” And if you can find a person who says “Be” to you, that is the person to listen to, that is the real master, because he is giving you the most fundamental thing. Through that vision you will be able to relax, and in relaxation there is clarity.
Confusion arises out of the idea of becoming because you become a duality – that which you are, and that which you would like to be. You become a duality, you deny your reality and impose the unreal upon yourself – a great tension. You become phony, you become pseudo, you become split. And what I am saying is not theoretical: you can look all around – the whole of humanity is split because everyone is trying to become someone else. Someone is trying to become a Christ, someone is trying to become a Buddha, someone is trying to become the richest man in the world, someone is trying to become the president of a country – but becoming, not being; in the name of religion also, becoming.
Then what difference is there between religion and ordinary worldly affairs? If the worldly man is trying to become the richest or most powerful, and the religious man is also trying to become someone – a Buddha, a Krishna – then what is the difference? Both are in the same boat; the name of the boat is becoming.
The truly religious person is the one who drops out of the whole trip of becoming, who relaxes in his being, who rejoices in his being, who says, “Aham brahmasmi – I am that, I am already that; Ana’l haq – I am truth, I am God.” These are just expressions of being. The basic message is: “I am already that, so I need not try to become.”
I have heard one of the most beautiful stories about a Hasid master, Sosya…

About seven hundred years ago, a great master and mystic named Sosya, ripe with years and honors, lay dying. His students and disciples asked him if he was afraid to die.
“Yes,” he said, “I am afraid to meet my maker.”
“How can that be? You have lived such an exemplary life. Like Moses, you have led us out of the wilderness of ignorance. Like Solomon, you have judged between us wisely.”
Sosya replied, “When I meet my maker, he will not ask, ‘Have you been Moses or Solomon?’ He will ask, ‘Have you been Sosya?’”

This is one of the most beautiful stories, meditate over it. Sosya says, “God will not ask me, ‘Have you been Moses or Solomon?’ He will ask me, ‘Have you been Sosya?’”
And remember, God is going to ask you the same thing. He will not ask you, “Have you been Jesus or Buddha or Kabir?” He will simply ask you, “Have you been yourself?” And millions of people are not being themselves. They are all trying to be someone else, something else. Rejecting their beings, they go on rushing toward some idea of becoming. They remain in confusion because they remain in duality. They remain in misery because becoming is not possible – they are trying the impossible.
Remember, misery arises only when you try the impossible – because you want it to happen and it can’t, in the nature of things. You want two plus two to be five: you will be miserable until you realize that two plus two cannot be five. For a few moments, you may believe it can be five, but sooner or later the truth will reveal itself: it is four. How long can you deceive yourself, and what is the point? You are simply wasting your life.
Don’t try to do the impossible – becoming is impossible. You cannot be anyone other than you are; let this idea sink deep into your heart. Let me repeat: you cannot be anyone other than you are, there is no becoming. All becoming is the world. Not to be a part of becoming is to be a sannyasin.
What is a sannyasin? – one who is no longer worried about becoming someone because he is absolutely attuned with his being; one who knows who he is and is happy in being that; one who is grateful in being that. Misery comes whenever you try the impossible. So remember, whenever you are miserable you must be trying something impossible.
Bliss is simply an outcome of being natural. Bliss is not an achievement: it is a by-product of relaxing with yourself, of simply being that which you are. Then this very moment, all misery can disappear; this very moment, there is bliss; this very moment, there is benediction – and the heavens open up and godliness starts showering. Suddenly, a great stirring is felt in your heart; you, who have been asleep, become awake.
Becoming is your sleep. Being is your buddhahood, being is your awakening. And becoming creates anguish because you have to find ways and means. And everything fails, nothing ever succeeds – nothing can ever succeed. Hence great anguish arises; your life, which could have bloomed into flowers, becomes only a bed of thorns.
But you are responsible, nobody else; it is your life, it is your responsibility. You have to take care of your being. And the greatest thing that can be said to you is: “Just be yourself.” Carry no idea about how you should be: drop all how’s, drop all ideals, drop all ideologies, drop all concepts, images, of how you should be. You are already that. Start enjoying that which you are, and then this very ordinary life suddenly becomes extraordinary. Then these ordinary days have such tremendous poetry, then these ordinary moments are full of dance. Then these ordinary people are no longer ordinary people; they turn into gods and goddesses. The moment you accept your being you accept everybody’s being.
Why has this happened at all? And why only to man? Why not to the trees and the birds and the animals? Why are the Himalayan peaks so beautiful, and why are the birds on the wing so enchanting, and why do the trees have such splendor? Why has all this disappeared from man’s life? There is a reason, and it has to be understood.
Man is the only conscious being on earth; that is his glory and that is his agony too. It depends on you whether it will be agony or glory. Consciousness is a double-edged sword. You have been given something very valuable, but you don’t know what to do with it; it is like a sword in the hands of a child. A sword can be used rightly, to protect, but it can be used to harm too. Anything that can become a blessing, can also become a curse – it depends on how you use it.
Man is the only conscious being, and consciousness has two possibilities: either it can become divine consciousness – then it is a benediction, or it can become self-consciousness – then it is a curse. And we have made it a curse. We have changed our consciousness into self-consciousness, we have created an ego out of being conscious. Rather than becoming aware of the organic unity of existence, rather than becoming aware of the orgasmic joy of existence, rather than becoming part of the universal, we have used our consciousness to separate ourselves from the universe, from existence, from life. Rather than making a bridge out of consciousness, we have made a wall.
And that’s what we are continuously being taught. Even modern psychology goes on teaching a very nonsensical thing: that the ego needs to be strengthened, that a man needs a strong ego because he has to fight in the struggle of life. If he does not have a strong ego, he will be defeated by other strong egos. There is a point to that, it is true: if you don’t have a strong ego, you cannot be a politician; if you don’t have a strong ego, you cannot become very rich. You have to fight tooth and nail for these things; you have to fight madly, neurotically, fanatically. You have to fight, utterly blind to what is happening. You have to go rushing into the crowd, you have to risk everything. Only then can you become very rich, very powerful.
But what is the point of much money and much power? In the first place they are not really needed to be happy, they are not really needed to be contented. Modern psychology is still teaching people to have strong egos: it is still not modern enough, in fact; it is still persisting in the old ideology, the old ideas. Psychology has a very long heritage; it has not yet been able to disconnect itself from its past. What the priest was saying in the past, now the psychologist is saying; he is simply repeating the same thing, with new jargon of course, with more scientific terminology – which is dangerous. The priest is exposed now, the priest no longer has any power; the power has moved to the psychoanalyst, psychiatrist, psychologist. The psychologist is the modern priest, and he is saying the same stupid thing that the priest has been saying down the ages: “Have a strong ego.”
The whole of education is based on giving you a strong ego. And the problem is that the stronger an ego you have, the more you feel you are separate, the more you are separate, and the more you are disconnected from existence. And to be separate from existence creates fear, creates paranoia.
Why are people so afraid of death? Do you think they are really afraid of death? You may not have meditated over it. Nobody is afraid of death. How can you be afraid of something which you have not yet seen? You cannot be afraid of something which is unknown, you can only be afraid of something which is known. A child is not afraid of catching hold of a snake, a child is not afraid of putting his hand into the fire. Why is he not afraid? – because he does not know. How can he be afraid of the snake? He has no past experience, no bitter experience. How can he be afraid of the flame? He has never been burned before.
How can you be afraid of death? You don’t know anything about death. Who knows, it may be a beautiful rest? Who knows, it may take you to a higher plane of life? Who knows, it may give you freedom from your body? Who knows? How can you be afraid of death? No, let me say it clearly: nobody is afraid of death.
I know you will say, “Everybody is afraid of death,” but there is something else in it: people are not afraid of death, they are afraid of losing their separation, they are afraid of losing their ego. The fear of death arises when you start feeling separate from existence because then death seems to be dangerous. What will happen to your ego, your personality? You have cultivated your personality with such care, with such effort, you have polished it your whole life – and death will come and destroy it. You will no longer be separate.
If you understand, if you see, if you feel and experience that you are not separate from existence, that you are one with it, all fear of death disappears – because there is nobody to die inside you.
There is nobody at all in the first place, existence lives through you. Saint Paul says, “Not I, but Christ, lives through me.” And Christ says, “Not I, but God, lives through me.” They are expressing their non-separation, they are declaring they are one with existence. Once you know you are one with existence, no death is possible. For death to be possible, first you have to create a private, personal life, then death becomes possible. You make death possible by creating the ego, and the stronger the ego, the more fear of death there will be. Hence, deep down, the most egoistic person is very, very prone to trembling, to fear of death. The less the ego, the less the fear of death.
That’s why small children are not afraid of death: their egos are not yet born. Animals are not afraid of death, they simply die; when death comes they die. When birth comes they are here, when death comes they are gone. A person of true consciousness will come like the wind, and will go like the wind; he will not leave any traces anywhere. He will not struggle with death because he does not struggle with life itself. He will allow life to flow through him, and he will also allow death to flow through him. Life comes from existence, and death comes from existence. Life is a manifestation, death is a rest.
And remember, if the fear of death disappears, then all other fears disappear automatically because they are nothing but by-products of the main, basic fear – the fear of death. Go into any of your fears, and ultimately you will come to rock bottom, and that will be the fear of death. You are afraid of losing money? Go deep into it and you will find that money somehow gives you a feeling that you are more protected, that you can resist death more than the poor man – hence you are afraid of losing money. If you are powerful, politically powerful, it appears you have conquered death: because you have power over other people’s lives there is the illusion that you have power over your own life too. It is sheer illusion, maintained by your high position: you are the president, the prime minister, and millions of people look up to you. You are so important, how can existence afford to lose you? You are so important, how can life continue without you? You are so important that you are needed – that gives you the feeling that you have conquered death.
And because you have such power over people you can kill thousands. Adolf Hitler killed millions of people, and those who have looked deeply into his mind are all convinced of one fact: he was very afraid of death. He was so afraid of death he never allowed anybody to be in his room at night, nobody was ever allowed to stay in the same room, not even the woman he had fallen in love with. He would lock the room and check everything because while he was asleep somebody could kill him. Who knows? The woman he had fallen in love with may be just a spy. He was so afraid, he never allowed anybody to come too close to him.
He married only three hours before he was going to commit suicide; there was not even the chance of a honeymoon. In fact, that was his honeymoon – suicide. In the middle of the night, the priest was called to marry him to the woman who he was in a kind of relationship with – it could not have been love because a man like Hitler cannot love. They were married, and the next thing they did was kill themselves.
When he was going to commit suicide there was no fear, he could allow the woman to come close. The game was lost, all was lost; the enemy had entered the capital, he could hear the bombs exploding close by. Now there was no hope, he had failed. Now he could marry. For what? For twenty years he had been waiting, for twenty years the woman had been waiting – but he was afraid of letting anybody too close.
This man killed millions of people for stupid reasons. He killed Jews, millions of Jews, with the stupid idea that it was because of the Jews that Germany had lost the First World War; that because of the Jews, the nation, the country, the race had fallen. Now, this is a stupid reason, with no logic, no relevance. The Jews had nothing to do with it, they had nothing to do with the fall of the German race. In reality, they have given us the greatest geniuses that Germany has ever known: Karl Marx was a Jew, Sigmund Freud was a Jew, Albert Einstein was a Jew. In fact it was the Jews who were the cream, but Hitler killed millions of them. Deep down, it seems he was suffering from an inferiority complex. And deep down he was suffering from such a fear of death that he wanted to kill, to convince himself: “If I can kill so many people, if I can kill millions of people, then I am so powerful I am beyond death.”
A man who is afraid of death is dangerous, dangerous to himself and to others. And this fear arises out of a very fallacious belief. The fallacy is that we think we are separate – consciousness gives us that possibility. In being conscious, man has been given such potential power that he has to be very careful how he uses it. Remember, if you move on the plains there is no danger of falling; if you move in the mountains, if you go toward the peaks, there is a great danger of falling. The higher you move, the more acute becomes the danger. Man is the only animal who is moving higher, toward the peaks, at the peaks. Consciousness is the mountain, and we have to be very alert.
That is the whole teaching of all the Buddhas and all the Krishnas and all the Christs; and that is the teaching of Kabir: be conscious. Be so conscious that you don’t create the self; be so alert that self-consciousness is not created at all. Just being conscious is a great freedom, a great liberation. By just being conscious, sooner or later you will become God-conscious. Self-consciousness is a disease: by being self-conscious you will eventually lose even that little consciousness that lies behind the self like a small tail; that consciousness will disappear too.
It is the ego that is the problem. The ego will make you more and more unconscious. The ego will enclose you like a prison wall. It will not even leave windows in your being to look out of. It will make you a monad: a windowless, closed cell. You will be encapsulated by the ego.
Hence I repeat again: the male mind is egoistic. You have to learn the way of the feminine. You have to become egoless, you have to learn the path of surrender. You have to learn how to melt into existence, how to become one with the rivers and the mountains and the clouds, how to feel affinity, attunement, at-onement. And then slowly, slowly, you will become a host. And the day you are a host, the guest comes.
God is not a hypothesis; religion does not propose any hypotheses. The hypothesis is part of the scientific world. A hypothesis is just an assumption to explain a few facts which cannot be explained without it. But a hypothesis is always temporary: “Tomorrow we will find a better hypothesis, and then we will discard this one.” Hence, science is discarding hypotheses every day; better and better ones are found and older ones discarded. Now Newton’s hypotheses are discarded because of Einstein, and sooner or later we will find even better hypotheses to explain the facts of the world.
A hypothesis is just a way of explaining the facts – it is man-made. Facts are there, and the mind wants to fix all those facts into a certain system because unless they are put into a certain system the mind feels uneasy, restless. Unless the facts are systematized, categorized, the mind feels very restless. The mind is a great systematizer, it wants to systematize everything. If there is no system available, it will invent one. Always remember that the hypothesis is only an assumption, it is an invention of the mind. You only use the hypothesis, you need not believe in it.
God is not a hypothesis. What is God then? God is a hypostasis, an experience. It does not explain anything, it is the experience of the unexplainable. I call it hypostasis – it cannot be changed, it is absolute, and it is not a belief. Those who believe in God, their God is a hypothesis. Those who know God, their God is a hypostasis, not a hypothesis.
Kabir knows. What he is saying is not an explanation, he is talking about an experience – he is sharing his joy, he is sharing something that he has known, he is singing a song about the unsung. Remember, whenever Kabir talks about God it is not a belief: he knows it, it is his experience. He is talking from his experience, hence he can be of immense help to you.
Those who believe cannot be of any help: they themselves don’t know. If somebody says, “I believe in God,” remember, he cannot be of any help to you. He himself is ignorant, hence his belief. Find a man who says, “I know God. This is not my belief, but my experience.” The miracle is that if you know God, you are God. Knowing God, one becomes God. The old Upanishads say: “Knowing God, one becomes that.”
Kabir is talking as a God-realized man, utterly drunk. His songs are short, but of immense beauty; the songs of a drunkard, drunk on the divine. They may not be great literature because he does not bother about the meter and the grammar and the language, but they are not composed songs, they are outpourings of his joy; a drunkard dancing, singing. You can’t expect formalities to be observed. These songs are very small gems; it is a question of quality, not quantity.
The original song begins:
Sai bin dard kareje hoy…
Without the beloved my heart aches, without the beloved my heart is nothing but pain, without the beloved I am living in hell. Sai bin dard kareje hoy… Without the beloved we are empty, hollow, we are negatives. Unless God enters into our beings, unless God blooms in our beings, we cannot be really existential, we remain shadows. And it is painful, it aches, it hurts, it is like a wound.
When my friend is away from me, I am depressed;
nothing in the daylight delights me,
sleep at night gives no rest.
Who can I tell about this?
The helplessness of the mystic: on the one hand he has tasted something of God, he has seen a glimpse, on the other hand he hankers for more; he does not want to leave that experience, that space, even for a single moment. But one cannot take hold of that space in one go. The experience is so tremendous, so huge, so enormous, that you cannot swallow it. You have to imbibe it slowly, slowly; you have to chew it and digest it. God is an ocean – you cannot drink it. You will have to slowly, slowly, become one with it.
Kabir knows, he has seen the face of the beloved. Now his heart is full of pain, the pain of separation. He has known the state of non-separation, maybe only for a few moments; for a few moments he has been transported to another world, he has tasted the nectar. Now he is back in the world, back to earth, and it is very painful. The world seems to be pale, utterly meaningless, with no significance. His heart longs for the beloved. There is only one thirst – to be again in that vast space, to be again with the friend.
When my friend is away from me, I am depressed; nothing in the daylight delights me… Once you have known God then these so-called days are like nights. Once you have known God then this life is like death. Once you have known God then all the joys of this life are nothing but sorrows. Now you can compare: everything that you had thought of as very sweet before, turns sour.
If you have been to the Himalayan peaks and you have experienced the virgin silence, the coolness, the smell of the snow, that otherworldly something which still exists in the Himalayas, coming back to the marketplace, the heart longs for it. Nobody will be able to understand why you look so sad, nobody will be able to understand why your eyes are so full of tears. It is not so in the Alps; no other mountains have that something, all other mountains are already polluted by man, all other mountains are already destroyed by man. Only the Himalayan peaks still have something very primitive, primordial, ancient, virgin. If you have experienced that silence you won’t enjoy, and nobody will understand why. To the man who has tasted God, the world becomes so futile, so utterly futile, that he is here, but not here; his heart continuously longs for God.
…nothing in the daylight delights me, sleep at night gives no rest. To know God is to know ultimate rest. Your sleep is not much of a rest. If you have known something of meditation you will understand what I mean when I say your sleep is not much of a rest. Your sleep is another kind of restlessness, that’s all; it is good for a change. In the day you are restless in one way, in the night you are restless in another way. Sleep is a kind of rest, good for a change. It is like you have been doing mathematics for three hours and you are tired, then you go into the garden and you dig a hole – it is a kind of rest. In fact it is a new kind of work, but now, tired of mathematics, digging the hole feels good.
That’s why in the schools, colleges, universities, we go on changing subjects; it is a kind of rest: one hour for mathematics, then an hour for geography, then another hour for history. We go on changing because the part of the mind that functions when you are working on mathematics is not the part which functions when you are studying literature. There are different parts, different centers in the mind, so if one center starts functioning the first center goes to sleep, has a kind of rest.
That’s exactly what happens during the night. In the daytime, your conscious mind functions and your unconscious remains hidden. In the night, the conscious mind goes to sleep and the unconscious functions; but work continues, much work, really great work. Your blood circulates, work continues; your heart beats, work continues; your breathing continues, your digestion continues. A thousand and one things are going on in the body, and a thousand and one things are going on in the mind too. Dreams upon dreams are coming; and not only that, a part of your mind blocks everything from the outside, prevents it from disturbing your sleep.
You want to get up early in the morning, at four o’clock. You fix the alarm and the alarm goes, but your mind is constantly working. It does not want you to be disturbed. The mind creates a dream: you start dreaming that you are passing a church and the church bells are ringing. This is a way for the mind to protect your sleep. It misinforms you, misguides you; it changes the alarm into church bells. Great work is going on. The mind is guarding, seeing what can be allowed and what cannot. And if something cannot be prevented, at least it can be interpreted in such a way that sleep is not disturbed. The mind is constantly on guard; great work continues the whole night.
But if you know meditation, then a few minutes of meditation can give you so much rest. Compared to that rest, your whole night will look like restlessness because in meditation you are utterly relaxed, the mind is not on guard, you are not focusing on anything. You are simply open and available, available to all kinds of things – the birds singing, the airplane passing by, the train, the people, the traffic noise. You are available to all. Meditation is not concentration, meditation is not excluding anything; meditation is inclusive of all.
And then there is a great silence amidst all the noise around you, great rest amidst all the turmoil around you. Once you have known the rest of meditation for even a few minutes your whole night will look like restlessness. Comparison will arise, but that is natural for one who has known God – that means one who has known samadhi, the ultimate peak of meditation. Kabir is right: …nothing in the daylight delights me, sleep at night gives no rest. Who can I tell about this? This is one of the greatest problems for the mystics: “Who can I tell about this, who will understand?”
I was traveling in this country for fifteen years, day in, day out, year in, year out, talking to thousands of people. Slowly, slowly, I became aware that I was talking to the walls. Those people could not understand what I was saying. They could hear, but they could not listen. The words reached them, but the meaning was left behind. I tried in every way, but it was impossible. Then I decided to stay in one place and only to talk to those few who really wanted to understand – and who were ready not only to understand, but to be transformed.
Many people come here, particularly Indians, and they ask, “Why isn’t the meeting open to all?” Because it is of no use to them and they will be a nuisance here. Their very presence will destroy something immensely beautiful that is being created. It is open only to those who are seekers. It is not a public place, it can never be a public place. It is a mystery school, it is only for those who are ready to go into the unknown, the unexplainable.
And it has been my experience that if I am talking to my sannyasins I feel a deep rapport, but if I am talking to non-sannyasins there seems to be some difficulty in communication. Many non-sannyasins have asked, “Why can’t we sit in front?” For the simple reason that if you are in front and I see you, it will be difficult for me to say that which I would like to say. Just looking at your faces, communication becomes difficult, some things become impossible. And what to say about communion? Looking at my sannyasins, looking into their eyes, communion is possible.
Kabir is right. He says: …who can I tell about this?
…kase kahun dukh hoy…
There is a great pain in my heart because I have known the bliss of being with the divine, but to whom can I communicate this? It would help me if I could communicate.
Hence, a buddhafield is always needed, satsang is needed. A community is needed where many people are searching together, where you can speak and you can rest assured that you will not be misunderstood. A commune is needed where you can share your burdens, your experiences; you can pour out your heart, and you will be understood, you will not feel embarrassed.
That’s what is happening here. If one sannyasin comes to another and starts crying, the other understands; the other will not start asking questions, questions which would be embarrassing to the person who is crying. He may hug him, he may hold his hand, but he will not start a great discussion about it: “Don’t be emotional, this is not good. Be a man, don’t cry.” No, he will understand, he will have sympathy, he will support. A commune becomes a support, where you can say things which are not ordinarily said in the outside world, where you can share experiences which seem imaginary, illusory, hallucinatory; things that if you tell them to somebody in the outside world they will think you are mad.
…kase kahun dukh hoy… Kabir says, I cannot find anybody to whom I can say this – that I have seen my lord, that I have been with my lord, and now I am again separated. I have known non-separation, those orgasmic moments, those peaks, and now I am thrown back into the dark valley. Now nothing here appeals to me anymore; the beauty here is almost ugliness compared to the beauty that has arisen in my vision. And the happiness here is just false because I have known authentic joy. And all the celebrations here are just a formality, people are moving in empty gestures. I have seen the real celebration!
The night is dark and long…hours go by…
because I am alone, I sit up suddenly,
fear goes through me…
The night is dark and long… You don’t know the night Kabir is talking about. He is not talking about the ordinary night, he is talking about the night that is known only by those who have seen the light – a very paradoxical phenomenon. He is talking about the night that only happens to those who have seen the dawn, who have seen something of the morning. And that morning has disappeared again, and now the night is darker than ever before. Great fear arises: “Will I ever be able to attain to that peak again? Was it real? Or have I only been dreaming?” Great fear grows, great trembling arises, he is scared to death. And he cannot even share it.
It would have helped Kabir if there had been a companion with whom it was possible to share the fear. It would have helped if some consoling words had come from somebody, if they had told him, “Don’t be worried, it will happen again. It has happened to me again.” That would have given him confidence. But whom to talk to? Kase kahun dukh hoy? I am in tremendous pain. But where to go, whom to go to, with whom to share?
…adhi ratiyan pichhle paharva,
sai bina taraf rahi soy…
Half the night is gone, waiting, waiting, waiting, and there is no sign. I cannot hear his footsteps. …adhi ratiyan pichhle paharva, sai bina taraf rahi soy… I have waited long, half the night has passed. Now the last of the night is passing and he has still not come, and I don’t see any sign, any indication, any message. And the darkness is becoming darker and darker; there seems to be no possibility that I will attain to him again. In deep despair, in great pain, I have fallen asleep again.
The night is dark and long… Remember one thing: that time is relative. If you are rejoicing, time goes fast, very fast; if you are in misery, in pain, time slows down. The clock moves at the same speed, but the psychological experience of time is very subjective.
You are sitting by the side of a person who is dying – then you will see how long the night becomes, there seems to be no end to it. You are with your beloved, you have met after many years – and the night goes as fast as if it were just a few moments. You cannot believe how fast it has gone. It seems the night has played a game with you, it went so fast – just to not allow you enough time with your beloved.
Time is relative – psychological time, not clock time. For those who have seen glimpses of God this world is really difficult to live in, and the night is very dark and very long. The Christian mystics have the right words for it; they call it “the dark night of the soul.”
Hours go by… because I am alone… You will know real aloneness only when you have seen God. Before that you have known aloneness: sometimes your friend is not with you, your wife is not with you, your husband is not with you, your children are not with you; yes, you have known a certain kind of aloneness. But that is nothing compared to the aloneness that you will know when you have seen God. That aloneness is like a knife to the heart. One is almost crucified.
I sit up suddenly, fear goes through me… I cannot sleep because he may be coming. Who knows when he will come? His ways are unpredictable, he comes at very unexpected moments. One has to be alert and watchful. So I wake up, I suddenly sit up, again and again, and fear goes through me: “He has not come. Has he forgotten me? Has he lost interest in me?”
These are the fears of a lover – tremendously magnified, infinitely magnified – when the lover is nobody but God himself, no other than God himself.
Kabir says: listen, my friend
there is one thing in the world that satisfies,
and that is a meeting with the guest.
Nothing else ever satisfies, nothing else can ever satisfy. Without attaining to God, without becoming God, without merging with God, you are going to remain discontented. Contentment, real contentment, has only one meaning – the meeting with the guest.
…kahat Kabir suno bhai pyare…
My dear friends, listen.
…sai mile sukh hoy.
There is only one possibility of bliss, and that is when the beloved has been found. And what is the way to find the beloved? – not searching. Lao Tzu says, “Seek, and you will not find. Do not seek, and find.” Seeking is not the way because seeking is again the male mind. Non-seeking is a passive waiting, just being ready, the door open, the house prepared for the guest, sitting on the doorstep, waiting.
This waiting is prayer, this waiting is meditation. This waiting is what is meant by being a host. The moment you have become a host the guest comes, inevitably comes; it has never been otherwise. It is not that you have to find God; if you are ready, God finds you. And how could you find God anyway? – you don’t know his address, you don’t know where he is, you don’t know his face. Even if you came across him you would not be able to recognize him. Even if you met him, the meeting is not going to be a real meeting because you will not recognize him. How could you recognize him? You have never seen him before.
Man cannot seek God – that is the message of these sutras. God can seek man – but then, what can man do? He should be ready, he should be available. If a hand comes from the beyond, he should not shrink back. If a voice comes from the beyond, he should be ready to listen – he will not be able to listen if his mind is noisy.
If God comes and knocks on your door, you should be ready to open the door, you should not be afraid of him. Yes, fear arises when the unknown comes, and when God knocks on your door it is a death for you – and a resurrection. But the resurrection will come later: first the crucifixion, first you will have to die.
Being with God means only one thing: dissolving in him – just as rivers come from the mountains and disappear into the ocean. Maybe there is a moment when the river hesitates. Kahlil Gibran says: “I have watched rivers falling into the ocean and I think that for a moment they hesitate, for a moment fear grips them. I have seen rivers looking back with great nostalgia at all the mountains that they have crossed, and the plains, and the beautiful trees on the banks, and the sunrises and the sunsets, and a thousand and one things.”
The ocean is vast – the river is going to lose its identity, and forever. There is a great nostalgia for all one’s memories, and a great desire not to lose one’s identity – but the river cannot go back. Man can go back, that is the problem. The river is bound to fall into the ocean, but man can turn back, even from the ultimate door.
If fear grips you, if you have a really strong ego and you become too protective of your separate existence, of your personality, of your ego, you may turn back, or you may close your doors. You may not listen to the voice of the beyond. And let me tell you, God comes every day and knocks on your doors. Sometimes he comes as the wind and knocks on your doors, but you don’t open them. And sometimes he comes in the rain, but you don’t go into the open, and you don’t stand under the sky to be soaked by him. No, you hide, you open your umbrellas. And you have psychological umbrellas too, and whenever he comes you avoid him; whenever he comes across you, you escape.
Kabir says, “If you want the guest to come, be a host.” Welcome him, receive him, embrace him. And he always comes, continuously comes, every moment of your life he is coming and searching for you, but you go on avoiding. All that is needed on your part is not to search for God but to be available. When God comes, be ready to surrender; when the ocean comes, be ready to disappear into it. Slip into it like a dewdrop: silently, prayerfully. Dancing, laughing, loving – disappear.
…kahat Kabir suno bhai pyare, sai mile sukh hoy. Kabir says, “My beloved friends, listen. All that I have to say is there is no other bliss than the meeting with the guest.”
Enough for today.

============================================================

The first question:
Osho,
Something inside me cringes with distrust when I hear you say “God,” and I notice that I am reluctant to embrace the word. Love, yes; divine presence, yes; the ultimate, yes; but this word God brings a hesitation to my lips and a shudder to my being. Will you comment on this condition?
There is a reason for it: in the name of God so much harm has been done. It is natural, this will happen to any intelligent person. The word God has become very dirty; remaining in the bad company of the priests it has lost all its beauty. It has become associated with the wrong people, the wrong meanings. Hence it is very natural that a shudder goes through your being, that a hesitation arises in you, that you cringe with distrust – but it has nothing to do with the word God. The word God in itself is beautiful, the word God in itself is innocent.
What has been done in the name of religion, the same has been done in the name of love. Mohammedans have been killing in the name of religion, God, brotherhood. Christians have been killing in the name of love. And this has been the case all over the world. If you look at the history of the word love, millions of people have been killed. Now the same is happening in the name of communism. The word is beautiful, it comes from commune. The same is happening in the name of democracy; that word too is beautiful.
So one thing has to be understood: words in themselves are innocent – depending on what you do with them. And if you have used the word God wrongly, who can prevent you from using the word love in the same way? And brotherhood, democracy, communism, humanity, peace? In the name of peace only war, and preparation for war, happens. So understand that one thing: do not become too conditioned for or against words – words are neutral.
The word God itself has tremendous beauty. It comes from a Greek root in which g stands for that, o stands for which, d stands for is. God is a code word; it means “that which is.” It contains all: the trees and the birds and the clouds and the sun, you and me. All that has happened, all that is happening, all that will ever happen.
God does not mean a person. Yes, it has been used that way, but what does that have to do with the poor word God? The word cannot prevent people from wrongly using it. It has been used as if there is an old man, very ancient, sitting in heaven, dominating, controlling – a great engineer who has created the world. The word itself does not have any meaning of that kind. It simply means the whole, the total.
And the whole is. Nobody can deny it, not even an atheist. The atheist can deny God as a person, but there is no God as a person, so the atheist is fighting with a shadow – just like the theist who is worshipping a shadow. The theist is stupid, so is the atheist; they are in the same boat. One is worshipping something which is not; the other is criticizing, fighting with something which is not. Both are engaged in a futile exercise. God means the whole, the total, the all.
It will be good if you can free the word God from the so-called religious people. The word in itself is beautiful and has to be saved. Hence I go on using it, knowing that it has been associated with the wrong people. But it is not the fault of the word God; it is helpless. You can use any word wrongly, and almost all beautiful words have been used wrongly. Remember, only beautiful words are used wrongly because they can become camouflage. Hiding behind them, you can do bad things more easily. God becomes a screen, and behind it you can be as violent as you like. Love, humanity, can also serve as beautiful words for hiding behind.
If you become antagonistic toward words in this way, not a single beautiful word will be left to you; all will have been used wrongly. And even if we invent new words, they will be used wrongly because the people, the great crowd on the earth, are still the same. The mind is still the same.
In Russia nobody believes in God now, but they believe in communism. They do the same in the name of communism as Christians have done in the name of God. What is the difference? In Russia nobody believes in the Bible, but they sacrifice as many people at the altar of Das Kapital as have been sacrificed in the name of the Bible. So what is the difference? Kaaba or Kremlin, there seems to be no difference at all. In China nobody believes in Buddha now, so nobody can commit any more crimes in the name of Buddha, but the same crimes are being committed in the name of communism and Chairman Mao – because the people are still the same.
Unless the mind of humanity changes this is going to go on happening. Hence, I won’t stop using the word God because then I would have to drop the word love too – while knowing perfectly well there are many people who would like me to drop it completely; you are not alone. You say, “Love, yes…” That simply means you are not aware that what has been done in the name of love is no less criminal than what has been done in the name of God. You say, “…divine presence, yes; the ultimate, yes…” But the same can be done; these words are just synonyms. Life, love, God, godliness, divine presence, the ultimate, the absolute, truth – they are all synonyms.
Don’t be too conditioned by the past, it is like remaining in a kind of bondage. One person hearing the word God simply falls to their knees and starts praying, but somebody else hearing it cringes. Both are conditioned, neither are free. If you shudder, if you hesitate, then the word God has immense power over you – negative of course, but great power – as much power as it has on the people who go to the churches and the temples. You are conditioned in a negative way, they are conditioned in a positive way. But conditioning is conditioning; whether negative or positive, it does not make you free.
Be free. And by being free, free these beautiful words too. Hence, I go on using the word God. To me God is synonymous with love, love is synonymous with life, life is synonymous with existence – they are synonyms. We have to claim these beautiful words back from the priests and politicians.

The second question:
Osho,
What is time?
Time has two meanings. One is chronological time, clock time. I cannot say much about it. You will have to ask a physicist, only he can say something about it, that is not my dimension of work. If you ask a physicist, like Albert Einstein, he will say time is the fourth dimension of space. But that does not make much sense, the mystery remains. The mystery remains as mysterious as it was before Albert Einstein.
Saint Augustine is reported to have said, “I know what time is if nobody asks me; if somebody asks me then I don’t know.” Time has a mysterious quality. Everybody lives in it, everybody feels it, everybody knows it – yet it is inexplicable.
The physicist has come to a certain understanding – that it is the fourth dimension of space – but that still does not demystify it. In fact it becomes even more mysterious. We have never thought of space and time as one, but now physicists say that they are one – not two. They use a single word for both: space-time.
But that is not my world, science is not my world. There is another meaning of time – psychological time. And whenever I use the word time I use it in this sense, which has significance, more significance than chronological time.
What is psychological time? – the mind is psychological time; the mind is time. If you don’t have a mind and you are simply silent with no thought moving within, there is no time for you – not psychological time. The clock will go on moving, but for you the inner clock stops – time stops, the world stops. That is my dimension, the dimension of meditation.
As you go deeper into meditation, time disappears. When meditation really blooms there is no time. When the mind disappears, time disappears – it happens simultaneously. Hence, down the ages the mystics have said that time and mind are nothing but two sides of the same coin. The mind cannot live without time and time cannot live without the mind. Time is a way for the mind to exist.
The mind creates the future through desire, through dreaming. The future does not exist, it is only in the imagination. And the mind creates the past too, it also does not exist, it is only in the memory. The past is no more, the future is not yet, but both exist in the mind. And because of the past and the future you have the feeling of time.
Time is not divided into three parts, as it is usually. Mystics divide time into two parts: the past and the future. Time has only two tenses: past and future. So what about the present? Mystics say the present is timeless because the present is mindless. When you are utterly in the present, herenow, there is neither mind nor time. You transcend both time and mind, you enter eternity. You are beyond time. You are in a totally different world – transformed, transmuted, transported.
When I talk about time, I mean the time that is created by the mind. The mind clings to the past and it clings to the future. It is not ready to renounce the past, it is not ready to die to the past, because it is in the past that it has its roots. And it is not ready to renounce the future, the desiring, the dreaming, because it is in desiring and dreaming that the mind lives. It needs space, a false space that it creates for itself: tomorrow – which never comes. The mind knows about yesterdays and tomorrows, but nothing of today.
Hence all the buddhas have insisted, “Live in this moment.” To live in this moment is meditation, to be simply herenow is meditation. Those who are simply herenow this very moment with me are in meditation. Meditation is the cuckoo calling from faraway, the airplane passing, the crows and the birds. All is silent, there is no movement in the mind – you are not thinking of the past and you are not thinking of the future. Time has stopped, the world has stopped.
Stopping the world is the whole art of meditation. And to live in the moment is to live in eternity. To taste the moment with no ideas, with no mind, is to taste immortality. Time is mind. Time is death. Going beyond time is going beyond mind and beyond death.
But if you want to know about chronological time, that is not my concern, you will have to ask a physicist. Psychological time is my basic concern. That’s my whole work here: to help you get out of psychological time.

The third question:
Osho,
What is greed?
Greed is the effort to stuff yourself with something – it may be sex, it may be food, it may be money, it may be power. Greed is the fear of inner emptiness. You are afraid of being empty and want to somehow possess more and more things. You want to go on stuffing things inside to forget your emptiness.
But to forget one’s emptiness is to forget one’s real self. To forget one’s emptiness is to forget the way to God. To forget one’s emptiness is the most stupid act in the world that a man is capable of.
Why do people want to forget? We are carrying an idea, given to us by others, that emptiness is death. It is not. That is a false notion perpetuated by society. Society has a deep investment in this idea because if people are not greedy this society cannot exist. If people are not greedy, then who is going to be mad for money, for power? The whole structure of this power-oriented society would collapse. If people are not greedy, who is going to call Alexander “the Great”? Alexander would be called “the Ridiculous” not “the Great,” “the Stupid” not “the Great.” Who is going to call the people who go on and on possessing things “respectable”? Who is going to give them respect? Those people would become a laughingstock: “They are mad, they are wasting their lives.” Who is going to pay respect to the prime ministers and the presidents? People would think them neurotic.
And the world will be really beautiful when Adolf Hitler and Mussolini and Churchill and people like that are thought to be neurotic; when nobody pays any attention to them. The whole structure of politics will collapse because the politician is only there to get more and more attention. The politician is a child, he has not grown up. He wants everybody to be at his disposal, he wants everybody to look up to him, he wants everybody to go on being attentive, to pay attention to him.
Attention makes one intoxicated; it is the greatest drug in the world. Just think of passing through the whole town and nobody paying you any attention, not even a dog barking at you, everybody ignoring you, even dogs; nobody taking any note of you, everybody thinking you are not. How would you feel? – you would feel very bad. Nobody saying “Hi,” “Hello,” “Good morning,” “Where are you going?” “How are you?” – people simply not looking at you. If you became invisible and you walked around, and nobody looked at you because nobody could see you, and nobody said “Hello,” nobody paid you any attention – how would you feel? You would feel reduced to nothingness, like a nonentity, a nobody. It would look like death.
Hence, people are in search of more and more attention. If you cannot get attention by being famous, then at least you can get attention by being notorious. If you cannot get attention by being a saint, you can get attention by being a murderer. And psychologists say that, basically, many murderers commit murder for no other reason than getting attention. When they murder, their photos are on the front pages of the newspapers, with their names in capital letters. They are on the TV, on the radio, everywhere; they become somebody. For a few days at least they can enjoy being famous; the whole world knows about them. They are not nonentities any more.
Just think of a world where people are not greedy – then the rich person will be thought neurotic, the politician will be thought neurotic. Then the people who are constantly hankering for attention will be thought retarded. If people are not greedy, we will have a totally different world, more beautiful. There will be fewer possessions, certainly, but more joy, more music, more dance, more love. People may not have so many gadgets in their houses, but people will be more alive. Right now we go on selling our life energies for gadgets. Gadgets go on accumulating and the soul goes on disappearing; machines go on increasing and man goes on disappearing.
When the world is nongreedy, people will be playing the guitar, the flute. People may be sitting silently under trees, meditating. Yes, people will be doing things, but only to the extent that is absolutely necessary; people will be fulfilling their needs. But needs are not desires: needs are necessary, desires are unnecessary. And desires never end. Needs are simple and can be fulfilled, but desires go on asking for more and more. They go on desiring for even more of the thing that you already have. You have one car, desire says have two; unless you have a two-car garage you are a nobody. You have one house, desire says have two; one in the hills at least. And when you have two, desire says have three: one on the seashore, one in the hills, and so on and so on.

Paddy was digging his garden one day, when he saw a little creature at his feet. He lifted his shovel up to kill it, but to his surprise it spoke.
“Paddy, I’m a leprechaun. Spare my life and I will grant ye three wishes.”
“Three wishes? Done!” said Paddy. Then he thought: “Well, I’m thirsty from all this digging. I would like a bottle of cold Guinness.”
The leprechaun snapped his fingers and Paddy found he was holding a bottle of Guinness.
“That there,” said the leprechaun, “is a magic bottle. It will never empty – it will pour forever.”
Paddy took a swig – lovely.
“What are your next two wishes, Paddy?” asked the leprechaun.
Paddy thought.
“I think I would like two more of these, please.”

It is of no use, but that’s how it goes, and it is never ending. You have a million dollars, already more than you can use, but you are asking for more. Yes, you need food, shelter, you need a few things. Your needs are small; everybody’s needs can be provided for. The world has enough to fulfill everybody’s needs, but desires… It is impossible, desires cannot be fulfilled. And because people are fulfilling their desires, millions of people’s needs are not fulfilled.
Basically, greed is a spiritual problem. You have been taught that you are a nobody if you don’t have lots of things; so you are afraid, so you go on stuffing yourself. That does not help; at the most it gives you temporary relief, and sooner or later you start feeling the emptiness again. Then, yet again, you fill it.
But that inner emptiness is the door to God. You have been told that an empty mind is the Devil’s workshop, or the Devil’s mind – that is absolute nonsense. The empty mind is the door to God. How can an empty mind be the Devil’s workshop? It is in the empty mind that the Devil dies completely. “The Devil” means the mind; an empty mind means no-mind.
Greed is one of the most fundamental problems you can encounter. You need to see why you are greedy – because you want to keep yourself occupied with things. By possessing more and more you remain occupied, engaged. You are able to forget all about your inner world, you can go on saying to it, “Wait. Let me have this much more, and then I am going to turn toward you.” And death always comes before your desires are fulfilled. Even if you live for a thousand years, your desires are not going to be fulfilled.
In India we have a very beautiful story…

A great king, Yayati, was dying. Death came.
It is an ancient story; in those days things were simpler and the other world was not so far away.
Death came and knocked on the door.
Yayati opened the door and said, “What? I have only lived for a hundred years, and here you are – and without any notice. I have not yet fulfilled my real desires. I should be given some time at least. I have been postponing things – tomorrow and tomorrow – but now you are here, and there will be no tomorrow. This is too cruel. Be kind to me.”
Death said, “I have to take somebody, I cannot go back empty-handed. But, seeing your misery, your old age, I will grant you a hundred years more – but one of your sons has to go with me now.”
Yayati had a hundred sons – and a hundred wives – so he said, “That is simple.”
But it was not as simple as he thought. He called his hundred sons, and asked one to go. “Save your old father’s life. You have said many times, ‘Father, we would die for you.’ Now the time has come to prove it.”
But these things are often said; they are polite nothings.
The sons started looking at each other. Someone was seventy, someone was seventy-five, someone else was sixty; they themselves were getting very old. But the youngest was just twenty.
The youngest son stood up and said, “I am ready to go.”
Nobody could believe it. His ninety-nine brothers could not believe it; they thought he was a fool. He had not lived yet, not at all. He was only twenty, just beginning life, just on the threshold. Even Death felt compassion.
Death took the young man aside and whispered in his ear, “Are you a fool? Your older brothers are not ready, and they have lived long lives. Someone who has lived for seventy-five years is not ready, but you are ready? Your father does not want to die, and he is a hundred years old – you are only twenty.”
Then the young man said something very beautiful, something of tremendous import. He said, “Seeing this – that my father has lived a hundred years, has all that one can have, and is still not satisfied – I see the futility of life. What is the point? I may live a hundred years and be in the same situation. If it was only my father, I would have thought, ‘Maybe he is an exception.’ But my brothers have also lived long lives – seventy-five years, seventy, sixty-five, sixty – they too are getting old and they are not satisfied. They have already enjoyed every kind of thing; what else is there?
“So one thing is certain: that is not the way to become satisfied. Hence I am ready to come with you, and I am coming, not in any despair, but in tremendous understanding. I am coming with you with great cheerfulness because I do not have to pass through that torture, those one hundred years of torture which my father has had to suffer. And because he is not yet able to go with you.”
And the story continues…
Again a hundred years passed; they came and went, unnoticed. Again Death knocked. Only then did Yayati become aware that another hundred years had passed. He said, “But I am still not ready!”
And this went on happening. And each time a son went with Death. And Yayati lived for a thousand years.
This is a very symbolic story.
After a thousand years of coming, Death came once again, and said, “What do you think now?”
And Yayati said, “Enough is enough. I am coming. I have seen that nothing can ever be fulfilled here. Desires go on growing. You fulfill one desire and ten others arise. The process goes on ad infinitum. I am coming willingly, and I can now say that my first son, who went with you, who was only twenty years old, had intelligence. I was stupid. It took a thousand years for me to see it, and he could see it when he was only twenty. That is intelligence.”

If you are intelligent, you will see the futility of greed. If you are intelligent, you will start living, rather than preparing to live. Greed is preparing to live. You can go on preparing, and the time to live will never come. If you are intelligent, you will not miss today for tomorrow. You will not sacrifice this moment for another one, you will live this moment in its totality. You will squeeze the whole juice out of this moment.
Jesus says to his disciples: “Think not of the morrow.” He is simply saying, “Don’t be greedy.” Whenever you think of the morrow you become greedy; it is greed that thinks of the morrow. Jesus says to his disciples: “Look at the lily flowers in the field. What is their secret? Why are they so beautiful? Even Solomon attired in all his grandeur was not so beautiful.” What is their secret? Their secret is simple: they think not of the morrow, they live in the moment. This moment is all and all – there is nothing behind, nothing ahead. The flowers enjoy this moment with their total being. Greed means postponing your life for tomorrow.
Try to see your greed. It can take so many forms: it can be worldly, it can be otherworldly. Beware. It may take the form of: “This life is not worth living, so I will prepare for another life; this earth is not worth living on, I will prepare for paradise.” But this too is greed.
Of your so-called saints, ninety-nine percent are greedy people, far more greedy than the people you will find in the marketplace. The greed of the people who live in the marketplace is not that great, it is very ordinary. They are asking for more money. That is very ordinary. But your saints, your mahatmas say, “That is temporary. We ask for something permanent, we want something eternal. We will sacrifice the temporal for the eternal.” They have a great motivation – they are looking out the corners of their eyes for paradise. There they will enjoy, and show those fools rushing about in the marketplace: “Look, we told you before, we warned you. Now you have to suffer in hell, and we will enjoy all the heavenly joys.” But this is greed, and wherever greed is, there is no heaven. It may be worldly, it may be otherworldly, but greed is hell.
See the stupidity of greed. Watch my words, I am not saying renounce, I am saying see the stupidity of greed. In that very seeing it disappears and your energy is free. Your consciousness is no longer entangled, entrapped, by things – money, power, prestige. Your consciousness is free. And freedom of consciousness is the greatest rejoicing.

The fourth question:
Osho,
Why don't I feel that I am myself?
Because you are not yet. Your feeling is indicative of a truth: nobody is himself. Everybody is wearing a mask, everybody is pretending to be somebody else. Your smile is painted, your face is not yours. You are simply fulfilling others’ expectations. Your parents wanted you to be this way, that’s why you are this way. Your teachers wanted you to be like this, that’s why you are like this. Your society demands that you are of a certain type and you simply fulfill it. You are a slave, you are not your own being.
So many demands are being made on you that you don’t have just one mask, you have many, because over twenty-four hours you have to change many times. When you go to the office and see the boss, you have to wear one mask – smiling, wagging your tail. When you are with your servant, you have a totally different mask – now you expect him to smile and wag his tail. You take revenge: what the boss has done to you, you will do to your servant, he will go home and do the same to his wife, and the wife will do the same to the kid, and the kid will do the same to his toy… And this goes on and on. With the friend you have one mask, with the stranger another; with the wife one and with your girlfriend another.
And you have become so skillful that the masks slip and change of their own accord. It has become an almost automatic process, and very smooth. This is what your personality is. Hence, it is true that you don’t feel you are your own self – this is the beginning of a great revolution in your life.
People think they are themselves. They are deceiving themselves; they are living in an illusion. It is good to know “I am not myself,” because that is the beginning. If you become very aware that you are not yourself, then sooner or later you will have to drop all falseness; then you will have to assert your true being.

An Irishman went for a job at a building site. The foreman told him, “You can start at 7:30 on Monday morning.”
Paddy went back to his flat and told his mates, “You must get me up at 7:00 a.m. on Monday morning because I start me new job at 7:30 and I mustn’t be late on the first morning.”
Monday morning arrived, and before his mates woke him up, they painted his hands and his face black.
“Paddy, get up. It’s 7:00 a.m.” Paddy woke up, had his breakfast and walked across town to the building site. The foreman went over to him.
“Yes, what can I do for you?”
The Irishman said, “You gave me a job and told me to start this morning.”
“I’m sorry, sir, there must be some mistake. I’ve only got one man starting this morning, and he’s Irish.” The Irishman left the building site and walked home slowly. As he walked past a shop window, he turned and saw that his face was black.
“By Jaasus, Dave woke the wrong bloody man up!”

This is the situation. You are not yourself. You go on doing things – getting married, giving birth to children, bringing up children – and you are not yourself. You will carry out all the functions of your life and die – and you never lived, you never allowed yourself to live. Somebody else lived in your place, and somebody else will die. You came here and you didn’t use the opportunity of life. You simply passed through without being at all enriched by life, by love, by the thousand and one experiences that life consists of.
Now, if the feeling is arising that “I am not myself,” don’t be worried. This feeling will create great worry in you; you will start feeling shaky. But don’t be worried. This is a blessing. This is a truth that is dawning on you – you are not yourself.
Now start searching for who you are. You are not your faces. Begin to search for your original face, the face you had before you were born, and the face you will have again when you are dead. Between the two, birth and death, you will have many faces which are not yours.
The time has come to be free of others’ expectations. Don’t go on fulfilling the expectations of others; that is a very subtle slavery. Your mother wants you to do this, your father wants you to do that, society wants this… And everybody wants something, everybody is making demands on you. Nobody leaves you alone, nobody wants you to do what you would like to do. Now the time has come – do your own thing, get out of this bondage.
This is what sannyas is all about: a declaration of freedom, a declaration that “I am going to be myself whatsoever the cost and whatsoever the consequences.” And you will not be a loser, that I can promise you; you will not be a loser, you will be infinitely enriched. You are not here to fulfill others’ expectations, you are here to live your authentic life.
And those who are doing the expecting are not aware of what they are doing to you: they are simply expecting the things which were expected of them. Their parents had expected certain things, so they followed, they remained slaves. And now they have given birth to you they are expecting the same things from you.
You will give birth to children. Remember, don’t force your expectations on them. Help them to be free: love them, but don’t give your ideas to them; love them, but don’t give your religions to them. Love them, help them to become more aware, so they can choose their religion, their ideas, whatsoever that might be. Help them to become strong, more conscious. Don’t give them any conscience, any character; give them more consciousness, every opportunity to become more alert. And trust life, don’t be so afraid: don’t prepare everything for them, otherwise they will never grow any backbone, they will remain spineless; don’t protect them too much. Yes, protect them when there is danger, but not too much, so they can learn to walk on their own two feet. Leave them alone sometimes, don’t constantly be after them; give them enough rope, give them some space where they can be themselves. Don’t overcrowd them, don’t impinge on them.
Get free of the interference of others. Yes, it will be difficult because the others are not going to leave you so easily – nobody wants to leave his slave. And they will talk about love, they will say, “I love you, so you have to follow me.” Love never asks that; that is not love. Love says, “Be a light unto yourself.” Love, if it is true, always gives you freedom; it trusts that the inner life you have – the inner light – will lead you, will guide you. Even if you go astray sometimes, that is good because one only learns by trial and error – there is no other way. You cannot be protected from committing errors. If you are protected from committing errors, you will never learn; you will always remain stupid, retarded – and that is the situation for millions of people in the world.
The average mental age of humanity is only twelve years. This is a very sad situation, very unfortunate. A seventy-year-old with a mental age of twelve? It can be the other way round too: the seventy-year-old can have a mental age of seven hundred years – that’s how it should be.

Somebody asked Emerson, “How old are you?” He was sixty, but he said, “Three hundred and sixty years old.”
The questioner could not believe his ears. He said, “Please, repeat that.”
And Emerson repeated it slowly. He said, “Three hundred and sixty, that is my actual age.”
And the man said, “Are you kidding? You don’t look more than sixty.”
Emerson said, “Chronologically I am sixty, but I have lived so much in those sixty years – six times more than people usually live – that I calculate my age to be three hundred and sixty years.”

Don’t die a retarded person. And don’t sacrifice yourself for beautiful names: love, duty, service, society. Your first duty is toward your being. Fulfill that duty first, and then all else will be fulfilled.
My own observation is that a person who loves himself deeply becomes so blissful that his whole life becomes a prayer, a service, compassion. Only a blissful person can have compassion, and only a blissful person can have love. The person who goes on following others, remaining so miserable deep down, so crippled – how can he love, how can he be compassionate? Yes, he can go through the empty motions of love, duty, but that is not going to fulfill him or the person he is dutiful to. It is not going to fulfill anybody.
Look at the situation. The whole of humanity pretends to love, and still there is no love. You don’t feel the fragrance of love, you don’t see the joy of love. And everybody is a lover. If so many millions of people were loving, the world would become a paradise. But it is not; it is a hell. And the reason is that nobody is courageous enough to be free of the expectations of others.
Be free. The time has come to be free. You need not hurt anybody. By being free I don’t mean being angry with others, or fighting with others, or reacting negatively. That again is not freedom. If you react, others will go on controlling you in a negative way.
For example: your mother has been teaching you that cleanliness is next to godliness, and now you want to be free – so uncleanliness becomes next to godliness. Your mother has been teaching you, every day, to take a cold shower first thing in the morning – and now you have forgotten completely what it feels like to have a shower; for years you have not taken a bath. This is not freedom, this is reaction: your mother is still controlling you in a negative way. She is still dominant; you are fighting with her.
Freedom simply means that you start living intelligently on your own, neither according to your mother nor against her. If you are against her you can never be free. Don’t be against anybody and don’t be for anybody, simply live out of your own simple intelligence. Yes, many times you will commit errors; that’s perfectly okay because that’s how one learns. Many times you will go astray; that’s absolutely all right – by going astray you will learn how to get back onto the right track. And when you get back onto the right track – what joy, what rejoicing, what celebration.
Don’t react, be rebellious. Rebellion is not reaction. Rebellion is not at all concerned with others, for or against. Rebellion is something that arises in you, that is not concerned with others. Reaction does not arise in you, it is concerned with others; first you were obedient, now you are disobedient. Don’t be obedient, don’t be disobedient – be intelligent. And soon you will be able to discover your original face, and that is how one should be.

The fifth question:
Osho,
The whole of existence, the birds, beasts, flowers and air, calls for our stillness, our meditation. All except one small insect, this winged parasite, this buzzing disturber, this mosquito.
Is he the Devil?
Mosquitoes are ancient meditators who have fallen. Hence, they are against anybody succeeding in meditation; they are very jealous. So whenever you meditate they are there to disturb, to distract.
And this is nothing new, this has always been so. It is mentioned in all the ancient scriptures; particularly in Jaina scriptures because the Jaina monk lives naked. Just think of a naked Jaina monk. And India. And mosquitoes. Mahavira had to give specific instructions on what attitude to take toward mosquitoes. He told his disciples that when mosquitoes attack, accept. This is the ultimate distraction: if you can win this, then there is no other difficulty, no greater difficulty. And when Mahavira says this, he knows it; to live naked in India is a difficult thing.

Once I stayed in Sarnath, where Buddha first turned the wheel of dhamma – delivered his first sermon, the most important sermon, which became the beginning of a new tradition. I was staying with a Buddhist monk.
I have seen mosquitoes, but nothing to compare with Sarnath mosquitoes. Pune mosquitoes are just nothing! You should be very happy about it; you are fortunate that I am not in Sarnath. The mosquitoes were really that big. Even in the daytime we used to sit under mosquito nets. On one bed, under one mosquito net, would sit a Buddhist monk, and on the other I would sit, and we would talk.
I said, “I am never going to come here again” – because he was asking me to come and stay again. I said, “Never, never. This is my first and last time.”
He said, “That reminds me that Buddhist monks have been laughing and joking down the ages about why Buddha never again came to Sarnath. He came only once. He delivered his first sermon, and escaped.”
Buddha went to other places many times. He must have gone to Shravasti at least thirty times, he must have gone to Rajgiri at least forty times, and so on and so forth. Each place that he visited, he visited again and again. But Sarnath, only once; he never went back there.
“And,” the monk said, “it is because of these mosquitoes. And you also say that you will never come again.”
I said to him, “At least in one thing I will follow Buddha. I cannot follow in other things – I have to be a light unto myself – but about this thing let him be the light.”

I know it is difficult, very difficult, but you will have to learn. Don’t be distracted. That does not mean that you allow the mosquitoes to exploit you. Protect yourself in every possible way, but with no anxiety, no irritation. Protect yourself, avoid the mosquitoes, wave them away, shake them off, but with no irritation. They are doing their thing, and that much has to be accepted. They are not particularly against you. Every mosquito must have his breakfast or lunch or dinner… So be polite. You have every right to protect yourself, but there is no need to be irritated. Irritation will disturb the meditation, not the mosquito. You can shake the mosquito off very meditatively, attentively; fully alert, with no irritation. Try it.
The real problem never comes from the outside; the real problem always comes from inner irritation. For example; dogs are barking outside and you are meditating. Now, immediately you are angry – these stupid dogs! But they are not in any way disturbing your meditation, they are simply enjoying their life. They must have seen a policeman or a postman or a sannyasin. Dogs are very much against uniforms, very anti-uniform. The moment they see a uniform they start barking. They don’t believe in uniforms, and they are entitled to have their own beliefs – but they are not particularly trying to disturb you.

Once I stayed in a rest house where a politician was also staying. He was the chief minister of a state. And just as you see mosquitoes here, exactly the same was the case with that rest house.
Somebody else has written that the mosquitos have disappeared from all over the city and have come to the ashram. They are not so much in the town as they are here in the ashram. In fact, they cannot get such juicy food anywhere else.
At that rest house, all the dogs of the town had somehow gathered. Such a great fight was going on. I fell asleep, but the politician could not. So he came to me, shook me awake, and said, “I feel envious of you. How can you sleep when there is so much disturbance? And I have gone outside and thrown stones at the dogs three times. They go away for a moment, but when I come in, they are back. I don’t think that I will sleep the whole night.”
I said, “If I can sleep, you can too.”
He said, “What is the secret?”
I said, “The secret is simple: you lie down and listen to the dogs as if they are singing a lullaby.”
He said, “Lullaby? And dogs?”
I said, “Try. You can’t lose anything by trying. Why be against them? Just the idea ‘I cannot sleep because the dogs are barking’ is the root cause of your disturbance: not the dogs and their barking – your idea. Drop the idea, accept the barking. Listen attentively, listen as if you are listening to music.”
He said, “Music?”
I said, “You have to drop it. Otherwise get lost and don’t disturb me. I have to sleep.”
Seeing no other way, he said, “Okay, I’ll try.” After fifteen minutes he was snoring. I went in and shook him. He said, “What are you doing? This is too much. Somehow I managed to get to sleep, and now you have awakened me again.”
I said, “I have come to ask. Did it work?”
He said, “It worked. Somehow I managed it. It was very difficult; it was very difficult to think of the barking as music, to think of it as a lullaby, to think of the dogs as friends. But seeing no other way I said, ‘Okay, let’s try.’ And it worked! Let me try once more. And please, don’t come again.”
In the morning he told me, “I will remember your secret. It can work in many situations; it can work in all situations.”

Mosquitoes are doing their thing. You have to protect yourself, you have to do your own thing, but don’t become irritated. Irritation is the only problem. If you cannot be irritated, if you are not distracted by all the nuisance that the mosquitoes are creating around you, you will even feel grateful to them: they have given you a secret key.
If the mosquitoes are not distracting you, then nothing can distract you. Then you have come to a very stable state of meditation.

The sixth question:
Osho,
You often speak of becoming a buddha. But Shankara often said that Buddha only brought his disciples to cosmic consciousness, and there are still higher states of consciousness, such as unity consciousness and Brahma consciousness.
Please will you comment on this and, if you know, tell us about the paths which lead to these states.
Buddha has not talked about cosmic consciousness at all. He talks about ultimate no-selfness, beyond which there is nothing, beyond which there cannot be anything. He talks about the total disappearance of the ego.
All other states belong to the ego: “I have attained this, I have attained that, I have attained cosmic consciousness and unity consciousness and Brahma consciousness…” Who is attaining these things? There must be some identity, some “I,” however subtle. Shankara remains confined to the self. He goes on refining it, polishing it, but he never goes beyond the self.
Buddha goes to no-self. Now, no-self cannot have many states. No-self is simply no-self – utter nothingness. How can nothingness have states? It is impossible because two nothingnesses cannot be different. Nobody has gone beyond Buddha. What Shankara is talking about is far lower.
There are ways to attain to cosmic consciousness and unity consciousness and Brahma consciousness, but they are nothing but new illusions. Even when you say and think, “I have become one with God,” you are there. Who is feeling that “I have become one with God”? Even to declare “Aham brahmasmi – I am the ultimate,” needs something of the “I” there to declare it; maybe the tail end – the elephant is gone but the tail is still there. And the tail is enough to bring the whole elephant back at any time.
Buddha is the ultimate, beyond which nobody has ever gone. Shankara is still groping far behind. Shankara is a great philosopher; Buddha is not a philosopher at all. Shankara is a great logician; Buddha is not a logician at all, he is a pure, existential mystic. Hence, Buddha never talks with all this jargon: cosmic consciousness, unity consciousness, Brahma consciousness – you can create as much jargon as you want.
If you are really interested in such nonsense, there is a sect in India, Radhaswami Sampradaya. They talk about fourteen levels, and they have a map, and only their master has attained to the fourteenth. Buddha and others are somewhere on the third, fourth, fifth levels; Krishna, Christ are somewhere on the second; Shankara and others are just somewhere on the seventh. The fourteenth they call the Land of Truth, satch-kand; that space of truth has been attained only by their master, Radhaswami. Now these games can be played…

Once a Radhaswami follower came to me and he said, “Do you know anything about the fourteenth level?”
I said, “Who cares about the fourteenth? Do you know about the fifteenth?”
He said, “The fifteenth? Never heard of it.”
“I have attained to the fifteenth.” I said, “And I know your guru – he is lagging just behind.”
And then he asked me for the secret of the fifteenth level!

All foolish talk – but this is how the ego works.
Now you seem to be a Shankara-freak; there are many in India. Shankara has impressed many because he was really clever at logical argumentation – but logical argumentation is just meaningless as far as existential experience is concerned.
Shankara used to say that the world is an illusion, and he would prove it. And it can be proved – logically – because it is very difficult to prove logically that the world is real. Who knows, you may simply be dreaming that you are listening to me, that I am here talking to you? Sometimes in a dream you have listened to me, and it seemed so real. So who knows, maybe you are dreaming now and it seems real? How can it be proved that I am really here and you are really there? There is no way to prove it; it may be a dream in fact.
Chuang Tzu says that in the night he dreamed that he had become a butterfly, and since then he has been very confused. Confused because now, in the morning, he thinks it may be just the butterfly that had fallen asleep and was dreaming that she was Chuang Tzu. Now, who is right: Chuang Tzu dreaming that he has become a butterfly, or the butterfly dreaming that she has become Chuang Tzu? Which is true? If Chuang Tzu can become a butterfly in a dream, why can’t a butterfly dream, sitting on foliage in the shade in the afternoon, and think that she has become Chuang Tzu? What is wrong with that? It can happen both ways. It is difficult to prove that the world is real.
Hence, Shankara was proving that the world is illusory, that all is illusory, only God is true. But one strange man – nobody knows who he was, he must have had great insight – greatly disturbed him…

One day, as was his habit, Shankara was coming from the Ganges, in Varanasi, early in the morning – he had taken his usual bath of purification in the river. It was still dark, he was coming up the stairs; and an untouchable, a sudra, touched him. Shankara was very angry and said, “You have destroyed my bath. I will have to go and bathe again. You should know better. Is this any way to behave? Can’t you recognize a brahmin?”
And the sudra, the untouchable, started laughing. He said, “But last night I heard you arguing, with great intelligence, with great acumen, that the world is illusory. So, first I thought that if the whole world is illusory, then untouchables must be illusory. How can an illusory untouchable touch you in the first place?
“Secondly, how can an illusory person destroy your purity? Who has touched whom? If my body is illusory, then your body also is illusory. Two illusions touching each other cannot be different. Or do you think your soul is pure and my soul is impure? If the soul can be impure like the body, then there is no way of making it pure. What do you think – have I touched your body or your soul? Who has become impure?
“Only last night I heard your argument; it was so great and I was so convinced – that’s why I have come.”
Shankara was at a loss, he touched the feet of the man and said, “Excuse me. It seems it was only logic – I have not yet experienced.”

Shankara was a great philosopher, the greatest that India has produced, but remember one thing: he is nowhere close to Buddha, and cannot be. In fact whatsoever he was saying was all borrowed from Buddha, hence he is known as a hidden Buddhist. Whatsoever he was saying, he only changed the words and terminology, he was talking about the same things. That is one of the arguments against Shankara: that he was just a Prachchhanna Buddha, a hidden Buddhist – using Hindu terminology instead of Buddhist terminology, that’s all. Don’t be too bothered with Shankara unless you are interested in philosophy. Then it is okay, you can read Shankara and you can read Nagarjuna and you can read Nimbarka, and you can read so many more in the West.
But if you are really interested in transformation, then Buddha will be of great help, Lao Tzu will be of great help, Jesus will be of great help. Listen to those who have reached the ultimate peak if you are really interested in transformation. Shankara was trying, and he said a few beautiful things, but nothing to compare to Buddha. And this is all nonsense, this cosmic consciousness, unity consciousness, Brahma consciousness. They are clever strategies to befool the masses.
Buddha talks only of anatta: no-self, ultimate emptiness, absolute death of the ego. When you have disappeared there is nothing more that can happen. To whom is it going to happen? When you are no more, all has happened. All happening disappears. That state where nothing happens any more is called nirvana.
Nirvana is a beautiful word. It means utter cessation. It means literally “blowing out the candle.” Just as you blow out a candle and suddenly the light disappears and is nowhere to be found, in deep meditation the small flame of the ego disappears. You blow it out, and there is utter nothingness: no experiencer, no experienced. That is nirvana. There is no more, and nothing beyond it.

The last question:
Osho,
Come on, be a sport and tell us that juicy joke!
One day, while studying the alphabet with her second-grade class, the teacher looked up and said, “Who can tell me a word that starts with the letter A?”
All the children raised their hands, but the teacher didn’t pick Johnny Badmouth because she knew he’d say “asshole” or some other bad word. Instead she called on Billy.
“Apple,” said Billy.
“Very good,” replied the teacher, “and who can tell me a word that starts with the letter B?”
Many children raised their hands, but again she didn’t pick Johnny Badmouth because she knew he’d say “bastard” or some other dirty word. She called on Mary.
“Boat,” said Mary.
“Very good,” the teacher replied.
And so she went on through the entire alphabet, each time ignoring Johnny Badmouth. “And who can tell me a word that starts with the letter R?” All the children raised their hands. The teacher racked her brains, but couldn’t think of a single dirty word that started with the letter R, and decided to call on Johnny.
“Rats,” said Johnny, and raised his hands to demonstrate. “Big fucking rats!”

Enough for today.

============================================================

The first question:
Osho,
When such incredible happiness descends, why do I feel so unworthy?
It’s natural because that which descends has nothing to do with your effort. It is grace, it is a gift from existence. And the gift is so big, so huge, so enormous, it is natural to be overwhelmed. It is like a flood, as if the ocean has descended into the dewdrop.
How can one feel worthy? You have not earned it. It has nothing to do with your effort, your doing, your practicing. It has simply come to you for no reason at all. Hence, one feels dumb, lost, in such awe that breathing stops, that the heart beats no more. The whole world stops.
Whenever it happens to someone, the experience is the same – a feeling of great unworthiness. But it is beautiful. It will give you a depth of humbleness; slowly, slowly, the ego will be eroded. And sooner or later you will find that only small things are possible with your effort, with your worth. All great things happen, they cannot be done – and remember, they happen for no reason at all.
The beauty of the sunset, the song of a bird, a small lonely flower, the moon… There is no reason for it at all. Nobody can answer why it is there: why the rose is so beautiful, why this existence exists at all, why the universe moves with such tremendous grace, harmony. There is no reason for it at all. Hence, I say it is a mystery, and it remains a mystery even for those who have gone deeply into it, who have become dissolved into it. It is never demystified.
But you are fortunate that those moments have started happening. Don’t be shy about receiving them, don’t be embarrassed. In the beginning it is natural to feel unworthy. Slowly, slowly, that grace will transform you. Those moments will come more and more; they will become natural. They will become a shadow to you: wherever you will be, they will be there. Waking, asleep, you will find that grace surrounding you. That grace will be without and within. That grace will become a luminous point within your heart, and the flame will go on burning.
But remember, don’t become too worried about your unworthiness. If you become too worried about your unworthiness, those moments will start disappearing because your focus will have changed. Rather than becoming focused on feeling unworthy, feel the compassion of the ultimate and become focused on that. Remember, they are two different gestalts; both are possible.
The unintelligent man will become too concerned about his unworthiness and will start denying those moments: “How can those moments happen when I am so unworthy? It must be my imagination, it must be a trick of the mind, I must be going crazy.” And you will become convinced by your own logic that those moments are not true. If they were true, then you would not be unworthy. Because you are so focused on your unworthiness you will prove them untrue.
And your society has been teaching you that you are unworthy. You have been told that you are of no use, that you are utterly worthless. You are nothing but dust – dust unto dust – you are more worthless than dirt. That’s what you have been told in so many ways; it has become a deep-rooted idea in you. If you pay too much attention to that idea, then the only possibility is that you will deny those moments.
I know many people who have denied the mysterious when it has knocked on their door, just because they cannot drop the idea of their unworthiness. Then your only possibility is to deny those moments, call them imaginary, hallucinations, dreams, deceptions; something must have gone wrong in your head, you are going berserk; forget all about them because they remind you of your unworthiness. But don’t be focused on your unworthiness, become focused on the compassion of God.
That’s why all the religions emphasize that God is compassionate: “Rahim, rahman, God is compassion.” That is just to give you an alternative gestalt, so you become focused on God’s compassion not on your unworthiness. You may be unworthy, but that is irrelevant – God is compassionate. You may be a sinner, that is irrelevant too – God is compassionate. He gives for no reason at all; he is simply a giver, he knows only giving. And he does not give conditionally; he gives unconditionally.
Jesus tells a parable again and again…

A rich man called for some laborers to work in his garden in the morning. The fruit was becoming ripe and had to be collected soon. But by the afternoon it was felt that there were not enough laborers; more were needed. So more laborers were called. By the evening it seemed that even those laborers were not enough; a few more were needed, and more were called. And when this third group of laborers came, the sun was almost setting.
Then it was night, and all the laborers were gathered together to be paid. The rich man gave exactly the same amount to everybody. Those who had come in the morning, those who had come in the afternoon and those who had only just come and not worked at all; they were all given the same amount of money. Naturally, the people who had been working the whole day in the hot sun complained; they were angry.
They said, “This is unjust! These people have only just come. They have not done anything at all, and they receive the same amount of money? And the people who came in the middle of the day and have done only half the work, they too receive the same amount of money as us? This is unfair!”
The wealthy man laughed and said, “Answer me one question. Is what I have given you enough for the labor you have done?”
The laborers said, “It is more than enough, but what about the others?”
And the rich man said, “You need not worry about the others. I give to them not because they have worked, I give to them because I have so much to give; I am burdened. Can’t I give my money to anyone, to whomsoever I want to give? Can’t I throw my money to the winds? You have received your worth. You have received because you worked, they have received because I have so much to give.”

This is a very strange parable; nobody has said such a thing except for Jesus. He is saying that those who have worked hard, those who have cultivated culture, virtue, character, those who have practiced austerities – the doers – they will receive; they will receive according to what they have done. But he says lovers will also receive, those who have not cultivated any virtue, who have not cultivated any austerity, who have simply lived and rejoiced, who have simply prayed, who are not great saints, who may even be known in the world as sinners. They will also receive, and the same amount because God is compassion.
Jesus is saying something of immense value. He is opening the doors of grace for people. That’s what is happening for you – not because you have done anything special to attain it, but because God has so much to give he goes on showering on anybody who is receptive.
And my work here is to help you become receptive. My function here is not to teach you how to attain to godliness, but to teach you how to receive godliness when it comes. And it comes; it comes every day, it comes every moment. You are just not in a receptive mood, hence you go on missing. It is not according to your saintliness that you will receive it – it is according to your emptiness, receptivity, humbleness.
You cannot earn godliness. It is always a gift, and whenever it comes you will feel unworthy. It is good to feel unworthy but don’t become focused on it, don’t become obsessed by it. When feeling unworthy, emphasize God’s compassion. When feeling unworthy, see the beauty of it – that the gift is unconditional, that you cannot claim it, yet it has been given to you.
You have heard Jesus’ famous statement: “Knock, and the door shall be opened unto you. Ask, and it shall be given. Seek, and ye shall find.”

One day, Rabiya, a woman Sufi mystic, was passing by the mosque when she saw Hassan, another Sufi, praying with great fervor, tears rolling down his cheeks, hands raised to the sky. He was crying and weeping, and saying to God, “Come, open the door. Let me in.”
This was usual with Hassan, an almost everyday ritual, five times a day. And it was not just a ritual, he was doing it very sincerely. He was a man of great qualities. It was not a mere ritual, his heart was in it. Rabiya had heard him many times, and whenever she heard him she smiled, laughed, and went on her way.
But on this day she went up to Hassan and shook him. Hassan looked at her, and Rabiya said, “How long are you going to do this? I tell you, the door is already open. You need not ask God again and again, ‘When will you open the door?’ Enough is enough. Don’t be foolish. I have heard enough of this nonsense. The door is open – just open your eyes and see.”

Rabiya’s statement goes far deeper than Jesus’ statement. Jesus says, “Knock, and the door shall be opened.” Rabiya says, “Open your eyes – the door is already open.” And I am saying to you: God is already coming, God has come. He is standing at your door. Open your door, open your eyes – just open your heart.
But certainly, when God’s energy showers on you, how can you feel you are worthy? Impossible! The gift is so big, as if somebody has given the Kohinoor diamond to a beggar. He cannot believe it; he will think it must be artificial, or maybe somebody is kidding him: “I am a beggar. Who would give me the Kohinoor diamond? Impossible! Maybe I am dreaming, maybe I have gone mad. I am projecting – this is an ordinary stone.”
That’s what happens to everybody when God comes in. So don’t become focused on being unworthy, become focused on God’s overflowing energy. God is overflowing energy, God is overflowing joy. God is sat-chit-anand – overflowing truth, overflowing consciousness, overflowing bliss. Whenever you are ready, receptive, it is just going to happen. It could have happened at any time; no time was the wrong time, no time was an unripe time. It did not happen for just one single reason: you were not open.
If you become obsessed with your unworthiness you will become closed again; it is natural. But see the compassion of existence. See the friendliness of existence, see its acceptance of you, whoever you are, wherever you are. Existence sees no difference between the saints and the sinners. God is available to everybody.

The second question:
Osho,
Why do I go on forgetting myself?
It is an ancient habit; for many, many lives you have practiced it. You have put so much energy into it, into forgetting yourself. You remember money, you remember others, you remember the world – all these things which Taoists call “the ten thousand and one things.” If you want to remember those ten thousand and one things, you will have to forget yourself because your eyes will be focused on things, on people, on the world, and of course you will fall into their shadow.
It is a long, long habit, just a habit. You are there – you could turn inward. But turning inward seems to be difficult because your neck has become paralyzed. For how many lives have you remained in this forgetfulness? Now, suddenly, you want to remember.
For one or two seconds at the most you can remember, then again you will forget. But those one or two seconds open the doors of hope. Don’t be worried: if you can remember for only a single moment, that’s enough, you have the key. You are never given more than a single moment at a time; you are never given two moments together. If you can remember for a single moment that’s enough, the key is there – now you can work it out. You know how to be alert, aware, in a single moment. After this moment is gone, another moment will be given to you – be alert and aware in that one too.
Remember, you will forget many times, but don’t be repentant. Otherwise one starts feeling guilty and creating complexities which don’t help, which in reality hinder. If you forget, so what. For millions of lives you have been forgetting – accept it. And the moment you remember that you have forgotten, it is good. Remember that you will forget again. When you forget, forget; when you remember, remember; but don’t make a problem out of it. Slowly, remembering more and more, by and by, gradually, the forgetfulness, the habit, will be broken.

Mrs. McMahon went berserk one afternoon. She broke every dish and cup and reduced her usually spotless kitchen to a shambles. The police arrived and took her to the city’s mental institution.
The head psychiatrist sent for her husband.
“Do you know any reason,” asked the shrink, “why your wife should suddenly lose her mind?”
“I am just as surprised as you are,” answered Mr. McMahon. “I can’t imagine what got into her. She has always been such a quiet, hardworking woman. Why, she has not been out of the kitchen in twenty years!”

For how many lives have you not been out of the kitchen? For how many lives have you remained in a state of forgetfulness, in a state of unconsciousness? Now, suddenly, you try to be aware – the weight of the past is too much, the chains of the past are too heavy. But they can be broken; all that is needed is perseverance and patience.
And you have to be very, very intelligent about it. Otherwise, I observe, people try to remember and when they cannot, they start feeling very guilty. That too is part of your habit: if you cannot do something you immediately start feeling guilty. And if you feel guilty it will be more difficult to remember. If you feel frustrated, sooner or later you will stop the very effort of remembering. Be intelligent. Because for many lives you have not remembered yourself, it is natural that you forget. Even if you can remember for a few moments, feel grateful, feel thankful – you are doing the impossible.
A little intelligence is needed. Otherwise, so-called religious people, rather than becoming religious, become simply guilt ridden. They become repentant, they start feeling as if they are condemned, as if they are not the chosen ones; as if God has thrown them into the dark night and has forgotten them: “It may have happened to a Buddha or a Kabir or a Krishna or a Zarathustra, but it is not going to happen to me. They were special people, that’s why it happened to them. They were already born enlightened, that’s why it happened to them. It can’t happen to me, I am an ordinary person.”
Just to avoid remembering, people have created all kinds of theories. Hindus say Krishna is an incarnation of God. Christians say Jesus is the only begotten son of God – the “only begotten,” mind you, and all others are bastards? The Jainas say Mahavira is a tirthankara, very special, not an ordinary soul. Not even an ordinary body: Mahavira does not perspire; he is not an ordinary human being. He does not defecate or urinate; no, he is not an ordinary being – he is very special, his body is special. Jesus is born of a virgin mother; he is not an ordinary mortal, even his birth is special, and so on and so forth.
Every religion has created these theories, and on the surface it looks as if you are paying great respect to Mahavira, Krishna, Buddha. You are not. In fact you are simply trying to avoid remembering yourself. You are saying, “They are special and I am not, so they can remember, they can realize, they can become enlightened. I cannot.” This is a very political strategy, but very unintelligent. This is how you are preventing yourself from becoming enlightened.
Nobody is special, or everybody is special. Nobody is an incarnation of God, or everybody is an incarnation of God. Choose either, but don’t make a few people special. That is a trick, and it is a very stupid trick. Because of it you have not remembered who you are yet. Be a little more intelligent. You have not remembered up to now because you have not yet decided to remember, that’s all. Now decide to remember.
This decision to remember is going to create many, many problems for you. Forgetfulness is easy, habitual, it has become second nature. Now you are going against your habits, and they will create every kind of hindrance, obstacle. You will only be able to pull yourself out of your habits for a few moments, and then they will drag you back into the old mire again. But don’t be worried: if it is possible to remember for even a single moment, it is possible to remember. That one moment is enough proof. And that one moment will give you such joy and such freedom that you will not be able to relapse back into forgetfulness forever.
But don’t make a fuss about it. If you forget, it is natural, accept it. If you remember, that is something great to rejoice about. Rather than repenting your forgetfulness, rejoice in being able to remember. Just a little intelligence…

The Irish paratroop trainees were flying out for their first parachute jump after several weeks’ training.
“Remember, lads,” said the instructor. “Yell ‘Geronimo!’ jump out, count to eight, and then pull your ripcord.”
The door opened at 10,000 feet, one by one all the lads jumped out, and Paddy went last. The instructor shut the door, and the plane flew down and landed. The instructor got out and saw Paddy still frantically clutching the plane’s wing.
“What the hell do you think you’re doing?” yelled the instructor.
“Sorry, sir,” said Paddy, “but I forgot the name of that bleeding Indian!”

That “Geronimo!” is not the name of any “bleeding Indian” – it is just an exclamation like “Hallelujah!” It is irrelevant too: the whole point is that after counting to eight you pull your ripcord. And counting to eight is also not to be followed literally – you can count to ten, you can count to six; that would do.
Don’t become too unintelligent in what you are doing, particularly when you are moving toward inward consciousness. Remember, everything is just a formal support; anything can be of help.
For example, you are sitting here. Just use, and remember, these words: “I am here.” And feel it – “I am here.” Not just the words, but the existential feel of “I am here” – a sudden remembering, a witnessing. Whenever you want to remember, repeat it: “I am here.” And then slowly, slowly, when you are capable of remembering “I am here,” and it has become a feeling in you – not just words in the head, but a feeling in the guts of “I am here” – then drop the word here. Then simply say: “I am,” and that will do, that will do far better. Just “I am” – a great remembrance, a great light, a great feeling of being rooted in existence.
But don’t become attached to the words. When you have become capable of remembering “I am,” drop the I. Then simply use the word am. Whenever you want to remember, just say: “Am.” But, finally, that too has to be dropped; these are just simple devices, not mantras to be repeated. Drop am, and simply remember without using any word. You can just give a small shrug, a nudge, and remember. Then even the nudge should be dropped.
All devices have to be dropped because the human tendency is to become more attached to the device than to the purpose.
You say, “Why do I go on forgetting myself?” – because you have been living in forgetfulness for many lives. This may be your first chance to remember. There are people who have tried to remember in their past lives; when they come, it is easier for them because nothing is ever lost. If you have meditated in your past lives, everything that you have done in those meditations will have remained part of your being, and whenever you meditate again that energy will become available.
But a few people are meditating for the first time; then it is a little more difficult, but not impossible. Take up the challenge. Never feel repentant. Just rejoice in the positive that happens to you and never be worried about the negative. Accept the negative as it is and rejoice in the positive – the positive will go on growing and the negative will reduce of its own accord.

The third question:
Osho,
I live in the world of the conditional: could, should, would, may, might and if are my dream operatives, accomplished only by my mind and usually in the past tense. Why am I so secure in this illusion?
One can be secure only in an illusion because security is the greatest illusion there is. Life is insecure. Love is insecure. To be is to be in insecurity. To be is to be in constant danger. Only the dead are secure because they cannot die anymore; nothing can ever happen to them now.
The more alive you are the more insecure you are. Hence many people have decided not to be alive because a kind of deadness gives security, protection, armor. Many people have decided not to look into reality because reality is insecure. I cannot do anything about it, you cannot do anything – it is how it is. Reality is insecure; one never knows what is going to happen in the next moment. I may be here, I may not be here; you may be here, you may not be here. The next breath may come in, may not come in. The person who loves you may simply forget all about you tomorrow. That’s how life is.
We have created illusions to hide ourselves behind, so we need not see the insecurity of life. Marriage is an illusion; love is a reality. Love is insecure. Nobody knows whether it is going to be there tomorrow or not. It is like a breeze: when it comes it comes, when it is gone it is gone. You cannot manipulate it, you cannot control it, you cannot predict it.
But the mind is very much afraid: if tomorrow your woman leaves you, what are you going to do? How will you ever be able to live without her? You have become so dependent on her, you cannot conceive of yourself without her, so you make some arrangements: you close the doors, close the windows, lock everything, so she cannot escape. That’s what marriage is: making legal locks so you cannot easily escape. You can go to the police, you can go to the court, you can harass the woman to come back. But when you close all the doors and all the windows, the woman is no longer the same as she was when she was under the sky, under the stars; she is no longer the same. The bird on the wing is a totally different phenomenon from the bird in the cage. The bird in the cage is no longer the same bird because it no longer has the same sky, the same freedom. It is imprisoned, its soul is killed. It only appears to be alive – its wings are cut. It only appears that it is alive; now it will just vegetate.
Without freedom there is no life. But there is one good thing about the cage: it has security. Now the bird need not be worried about food; tomorrow morning he is going to be fed as usual. He need not worry about enemies, predators; nobody can attack him. The bird may think he is not caged but protected. He may think the iron bars are not enemies but friends; he may start loving them. Even if one day you want to make him free, he may not like the very idea; he may resist. He may not go even if you open the door. He will say, “I am not going. How can I leave my security?” He has forgotten all the joys of freedom; now he only remembers the comfort and convenience of security.
Marriage is a cage, love is the open sky. We have destroyed love and created an illusion, marriage. It is ugly. Two persons together out of love is one thing, but two persons together because of the law is totally different. Their souls are no longer together, only their bodies are tied together. Because they cannot escape they decide to remain slaves because escape seems to be costly – the children are there, and all the comforts of family life and the home. They decide not to live but just to exist.
And then of course, people have many kinds of illusions about the past, about the future. You are not alone: every human being is in the same boat – because we cannot live in the present. It is dangerous to live in the present because to live in the present means to be authentic. We live in the past, we live in the future. The past and the future are very easy, comfortable, no danger. You can manipulate your past, you can control it; you can order your past, it is very obedient. It is nonexistential, it exists only in your memory; you can arrange it again and again.
Hence, one of the greatest psychological insights is that up to now no autobiography has ever been written. Millions seem to have been written, but they are all untrue. To write an autobiography seems to be almost impossible because you go on always arranging your memories. When you look back, it is not the real past that you are looking at; it is no longer there, just your memory of it.
And in the memory, you also choose. First, you choose while you are experiencing something. A thousand and one things are happening every day, but you choose to remember only a few; scientists say two percent. Ninety-eight percent is not chosen, only two percent. Everything that feels good to you – ego enhancing, gratifying – you choose. Anything that seems like suffering, pain – all that hurts – you don’t choose.
First, your memories have been chosen and then, each time you remember them, you are giving them new colors because your experiences are growing, and your new experiences are being reflected in your memories. You go on painting your memories again and again, so that by the time you write your autobiography there are many coats.
And people write autobiographies only when they know they are dead. When they know that nothing more is going to happen now, then they write their autobiographies. When a person is alive, how can he write his autobiography? But when he thinks that everything is finished: “I have lived, I have come to the full stop, nothing else is going to happen,” then he writes. Now he looks back, paints all the memories as he wants them to be. All autobiographies are fiction. My suggestion to librarians is this: all autobiographies should be counted as fiction and should be categorized as fiction. They are fiction and nothing else.
You magnify things which you like. You unconsciously add many things which never happened. And I am not saying that you are cheating knowingly – no, you may believe it. Just start telling a lie, and after ten years you will be suspicious of whether it is a lie or the truth…

A journalist died. He knocked on the doors of heaven. Saint Peter opened the door and asked, “Sorry, are you a journalist?”
Because it is very difficult to miss a journalist: his face, his eyes; he looks like one.
And the man said, “Yes, but how did you know?”
“It is very easy to spot a journalist. I am sorry, but we don’t have places for any more journalists in heaven, our quota is full. We only have a dozen journalists, and even those are not used because nothing ever happens in heaven, nothing worth reporting, nothing like news.”
Do you know George Bernard Shaw’s definition of news? “When a dog bites a man, that is not news,” that is nothing. “If a man bites a dog that is news.”
Saint Peter continued: “In heaven, no newspaper is published, news doesn’t happen. Even those twelve journalists are not used, so what do we need you for? Go to hell – down there, there is news and news and news. Everything there is news, nothing else ever happens. And there are many, many high circulation papers. Go there and you will get a good job.”
But the journalist said, “No, I can’t go there. Can’t you manage something? If you give me twenty-four hours, I can convince some other journalist to go to hell, and then you can allow me in, in his place.”
Saint Peter said, “Okay… Twenty-four hours. In you go.”
The journalist entered heaven and used all his journalistic skills and acumen. He started a rumor: to whomsoever he came across he said, “Have you heard? A big newspaper is being started in hell and all the posts are vacant – the chief editor, the assistant chief editor, other assistants…” And this and that he said to whomsoever he met.
But after twenty-four hours, he went back to the door. Saint Peter would not open it. He said, “You cannot go out, you have to stay in.”
The journalist said, “But what is the matter?”
Saint Peter said, “All twelve journalists have left. We should have at least one journalist, just for the sake of representation. You must stay here!”
The journalist said, “I can’t stay here anymore. Let me go! There must be some news in hell. How can twelve persons believe it if there isn’t any? It can’t be just a rumor, there must be some truth in it; maybe just a little, but there must be some truth in it. I can’t remain here any longer. Open the door, let me go!”

If you start a lie, sooner or later you will believe it. In fact you will believe in it before others do, and after ten years it will be difficult to tell whether it was a lie or not. After ten years it will be difficult to tell whether you dreamed the thing or you really lived it. Your dreams and your life will become mixed into each other.
It is very difficult to write an autobiography. It has not yet been done, and I don’t think it ever can be done. Those who can write, don’t. A buddha can, but he says he has no autobiography to write. He says, “I was never born.” He says, “I have never uttered a single word.” He says, “I never became enlightened because I was never unenlightened.” He says, “I never died because nothing ever dies.”
So what autobiography? There is no self, so what autobiography? There is no ego, there is no center, so what about the circumference? No circumference is possible. A buddha can write, but he will not, and others who write are bound to write fictions.
You go on living in the past; it is very comfortable. You are the master of your past; you can do anything you want to do with the past. And you are also the master of your future: you can become the President of America, of India – in the future. You can do anything you want – everybody can do something. Just sitting silently, you can start imagining that by the side of the road you have found a bag full of money. And not only that, you can start planning how to use that money; you can start purchasing things. You are the master.
The past and the future give you the idea that you are a king. The present takes all illusions away, the present simply reveals the naked truth. The present reveals the insecurity of life because life implies death: everything that is, implies that life cannot be forever; everything that is, is going to be nonexistential sooner or later. The flower that has bloomed in the morning is beautiful, but by the evening it will be gone, the petals will wither away and tomorrow you will not find even a trace of it. That’s how life really is: changing, moving, dynamic, nothing static, nothing permanent, always in a flux. That’s why everybody, not only you, is living in the past and the future: to avoid the present and its danger.
Friedrich Nietzsche is right: he says, “Live dangerously.” There is no other way to live in fact. One can only live dangerously; the other way is to avoid life, not live. And that’s what sannyas is all about: accepting the insecurity of life, accepting death, accepting that everything can disappear at any moment. Your love, your friendship, you – everything is only for the moment. The next moment the petals will wither away, all will be gone.
Knowing this and yet rejoicing, knowing this and yet dancing, knowing this and yet having a song on your lips, knowing this and yet having joy in your eyes – that’s what sannyas is all about. In fact, this insecurity is beautiful. This insecurity has a blessing in it because if everything were secure there would be no life at all. If everything were secure there would be rocks and rocks – no flowers, no birds, no people. If everything were secure there might be notes, mathematics, science, but no poetry, no music, no dance. The world would be a dead world, phony, plastic. The real world has to be in constant danger. That danger adds to its beauty, that danger gives it depth, that danger makes it challenging. Come out of your security and your illusions.
You say, “I live in the world of the conditional…” The world of the conditional is the world of the mind. The true world is unconditional. You cannot put any conditions on the truth, and truth never puts any conditions on you. Neither can you put conditions on existence, nor does existence ever put any conditions on you. All is given unconditionally.
You say, “I live in the world of the conditional…” That means you don’t live, you only pretend. You say, “I live in…could, should, would, may, might and if…” These are words which belong to the world of death, not to the world of life. Life simply is, it knows nothing of should, could, would. Life simply is, it knows nothing of may, might. Life simply is, it knows nothing of ifs and buts.
You must live that which is, whatsoever it is. Yes, sometimes it hurts, and it hurts very much. Sometimes it brings great agonies, but those agonies are stepping-stones to ecstasy; those hurts are nothing but birth pains. You have to accept the day and the night, birth and death, summer and winter. You have to accept all that life is. You cannot reject anything, you cannot make conditions. Your conditions won’t make any difference, they will only drown you in your own illusions. Live in the is. The word ought is a mind construction – avoid it.
You ask, “Why am I so secure in this illusion?” One can only be secure in illusions; there is no question of why. If you find somebody who is secure, you can be certain he must be living in an illusion.
You have become too accustomed to a dirty pool of water, stagnant, stinking. Insecurity has tremendous beauty; you have not tasted it. You have forgotten the beauty of a river, constantly flowing from the known to the unknown, from the limited to the unlimited. I have to revive your memory of it. It is a remembering because you knew it before.
When a child is born he knows nothing of security; he knows nothing of the past, nothing of the future. He simply lives in the is. We drive him out of the is. That’s what we call education, that’s what we call the process of civilizing a child: driving him out of the is, taking him out of life’s naturalness and making him arbitrary and artificial. By the age of three or four a child becomes part of society; he loses all contact with existence, with reality.
Once, you knew what it meant to be insecure. All that I need to do is remind you, to provoke that remembrance in you. And once you have tasted it again you will drop all your illusions and start moving into the unknown, with all its insecurity.
And you will not feel frightened, you will feel thrilled. You will not feel that insecurity is something wrong, but the root of all adventure. Insecurity is not something that is against you, it is the very possibility of your existence. It sharpens your intelligence, it keeps you alive, alert. It keeps you always mystified, it keeps you in a state of constant surprise.
Insecurity is beautiful. And the day that you know that insecurity is beautiful, you will know the wisdom of insecurity – and you will have understood the very core of sannyas.

The fourth question:
Osho,
I am a staunch Catholic. Nobody can shake my beliefs, so why do I feel a little frightened here?
Alexander, you have fallen into the wrong company. Escape from here as fast as you can because you have already been shaken!
A belief has no roots, it is just an imposed phenomenon. Howsoever staunchly you believe in it makes no difference. In fact, the more you are afraid of losing it, the more staunchly you believe in it. Whenever somebody says, “This is my strong belief,” know well that he is afraid. Otherwise what does it mean? Why should he brag about his staunchness? If he knows, he knows.
You know that the sun has risen, that it is day. You don’t say, “I strongly believe that this is sunrise,” you simply say, “I know this is sunrise.” You don’t say, “I strongly believe, nobody can shake my belief.” If you say it, people will think you are crazy. If you say it, people will think you must be blind; you are not seeing the sun, you have only heard about it. Others must have told you and you are saying, “I believe strongly.” Just to protect yourself you create a great armor around yourself. But a real experience needs no protection. The real experience needs no bragging about being staunch. One simply knows or knows not; things are very simple.
You say, “I am a staunch Catholic.” It is just accidental that you were born in a Catholic house. If you were born and brought up by a Hindu you would be a staunch Hindu. And if you were born in Soviet Russia and you were brought up by a communist, you would be a staunch communist. The staunchness would be the same, everything else would be different. That staunchness simply shows that you are not intelligent.
An intelligent person does not believe. He tries to know, he inquires. An intelligent person is neither Catholic nor Protestant; an intelligent person is neither Hindu nor Mohammedan. An intelligent person says, “I don’t know yet, so how can I claim what is right and what is wrong? How can I say that the Bible is right and the Koran is wrong, or vice versa?” An intelligent person is bound to say only one thing: “I don’t know, and I cannot carry any prejudice if I really want to know.” He remains unprejudiced, open.
By being a Catholic you are closed, by being a Jaina you are closed, by being a Buddhist you are closed. You are not an inquirer, you are not a seeker. You don’t love truth, you love security. Belief gives you security.
And if you want to know the truth you have to begin with agnosticism; you have to begin from the state of not knowing. Every true inquiry starts from not knowing. You have to be clearly aware: “I don’t know – but I have to seek, I have to search, I have to find. And I should start without any a priori conception.”
That’s why you are becoming a little afraid, frightened. You may not have landed in such a society before – these people are dangerous. Don’t tell me later on that I didn’t give you any warning.
Alexander, please escape. You don’t seem to be much of an Alexander either, and you are certainly not in the right company.
Have you heard this story?

During World War Two, Ferrara the Flyer had never shot down a British plane and everybody in the squadron kidded him about it.
One day while on patrol Ferrara spotted five British transport planes. He zipped into their formation and shot down all five. Now he couldn’t wait to tell his fellow pilots. Ferrara quickly landed, jumped out of his plane and rushed over to a colonel standing beside a map table.
“I just-a shoot down five-a British-a transports!” shouted the proud Italian.
“I say, bad luck, old chap!” replied the officer. “You are in the wrong place. You shouldn’t have landed here, old chap!”

You say, “Nobody can shake my beliefs…” But why do you say it in the first place? Why does the idea come into your mind? I have not asked you, nobody has asked you.
“Nobody can shake my beliefs…” You are already shaking inside, I can see you trembling. And it is natural because you know that you don’t know, you know that those beliefs are just borrowed from others. The priests have told you and you have believed. You have believed because you were not really interested in the truth, so you said, “Okay.” You were not really caring enough about truth so you said okay.
People are so uncaring about truth that they say, “Whatsoever you say, it must be right. Who cares? I am not interested enough to bother.”
That’s the situation in the world: a few are Christians, a few are Hindus, a few are Mohammedans. If you look deeply into them you will see that they don’t care whether God is or is not, they don’t care what truth is. They have simply accepted the belief that the people around them have. It is formal, a type of social security; it feels good to be part of the crowd, it feels good that others think you are religious.
But you are not religious. It is not easy to be religious. To be religious is one of the most dangerous adventures in life. It means dropping all beliefs and going into the unknown without any maps. It is good if you allow us to destroy your beliefs; it will be healthy for you if you don’t cling to your beliefs. And something seems to have started.
You say, “…but why do I feel a little frightened here?” You have started becoming aware that your Catholicism is phony. There has only been one Christian, and he was crucified on the cross. Since then there have not been any Christians.
In fact, be a Christ, don’t be a Christian. Don’t disrespect yourself by being a Christian. You are meant to be a Christ. You are meant to be a Buddha, not a Buddhist. What is a Buddhist compared to being a Buddha? A Buddhist is just a believer, not a seeker, not an inquirer. Go on the voyage, the sea is calling you. Go alone, and go without maps and without scriptures. And if you can drop all your scriptures and maps and ideologies on this bank, the other bank is not far away.
The man who is utterly empty of knowledge is immediately worthy of receiving the ultimate gift of knowing from existence. Only those who renounce knowledge become capable of knowing.

The fifth question:
Osho,
What do you mean when you say, “Meditate over it”? Please explain it in relation to my problem of jealousy?
When I say, “Meditate over it,” I don’t mean think it over, I don’t mean concentrate on it, I don’t mean contemplate it. When I say meditate over it, I mean watch it, be a witness. Whatsoever the problem – anger, sexuality, jealousy, greed, ego – whatsoever the problem is, the medicine is the same.
If you suffer from jealousy, just watch how it arises in you, how it grabs you, how it surrounds you, clouds you; how it tries to manipulate you, how it drags you into paths that you never wanted to go to in the first place. How it finally creates great frustration in you, how it destroys your energy, dissipates your energy, and leaves you very depressed, frustrated. Just watch the whole thing.
And remember not to condemn it because if you condemn, you have started thinking. I am not saying condemn it. Just see the facticity of it without condemnation, without any appreciation, without any judgment for or against. Just watch it, aloof and distant, as if you have nothing to do with it. Be very scientific in your watching.
One of the most important contributions of science to the world is nonjudgmental observation. When a scientist is experimenting he simply experiments without any judgment, without any conclusion. If he has a conclusion already in his mind, that means he is not a scientist, his conclusion will influence the experiment.
One man has written a book about how in America people are very superstitious and afraid of the number thirteen. Even in hotels you will not find a room number thirteen. After twelve comes fourteen because nobody stays, nobody wants to stay, in the thirteenth room. You will not even find a thirteenth floor – the whole floor is missing. After the twelfth floor they have the fourteenth because who wants to stay on the thirteenth floor?
This writer has collected thousands of facts that say this is not a superstition, that this is the truth. He has collected information about all the people who have committed suicide on the thirteenth of the month. Of course, millions of people murder, commit suicide, on the thirteenth, as much as on the twelfth, as much as on the fourteenth – but he only collects information about the thirteenth. And many people commit suicide from the thirteenth floor, and many people commit suicide in room number thirteen. Many things happen; in the world things are continuously happening. This man brought his thesis to show me, and I told him, “You have done a really great job.”
He said, “I have been working on it for almost five years.” He had gathered millions of facts. He said, “Now who can say that this is superstition?”
I said, “Do one more thing – it will take another five years – now try to find out about the number twelve.”
He already had a conclusion: that there was something wrong with the number thirteen, something evil about it – he had chosen his facts with that idea in mind.
And I also said, “Do another thing. After you are finished with the number twelve, then for five more years do another experiment. Find out how many good things happen with the number thirteen. Room number thirteen, the thirteenth story of the hotel, the thirteenth day of the month – find out how many good things happen. Only then can your conclusion be of any scientific value. You are already prejudiced.”

A Hindu psychologist, Doctor Bannerji, once came to see me. He said, “I am trying to prove scientifically that rebirth is a fact and not a hypothesis.”
I said, “Doctor Bannerji, you say you are trying to prove it scientifically?”
“Yes,” he said.
I told him, “But if you are trying to prove something scientifically, you should not have any conclusion beforehand. You have already accepted the Hindu idea of rebirth. You are working as a Hindu, not as a scientist.”
He got very angry because he had come to me for support for his belief.
I said, “I am not saying anything against your belief, I am not saying whether or not rebirth is a fact. All I am saying is this: don’t bring science into it. If you bring science into it, then a fundamental principle of science is to be an unprejudiced, nonjudgmental observer, without any a priori conclusion.”

A priori conclusions make you a believer, not a scientist.
When I say meditate over it, I mean watch. Be a scientist in your inner world. Let your mind be your lab, and observe – without condemning, remember. Don’t say, “Jealousy is bad.” Who knows? Don’t say, “Anger is bad.” Who knows? Yes, you have heard, you have been told, but that is what others say, that is not your experience. You have to be very existential, experiential. Unless your experiment proves it, you are not to say yes or no to anything. You have to be utterly nonjudgmental. And then watching jealousy or anger or sex is a miracle.
What happens when you watch without any judgment? You start seeing through and through. Jealousy becomes transparent: you see the stupidity of it, you see the foolishness of it. Not that you have already decided it is stupid; if you have already decided you will miss the whole point. Remember, I am not saying to decide it is stupid, it is foolish. If you decide, you miss the point.
Simply go ahead without any decision, just to see exactly what it is. What is this jealousy? What is this energy called jealousy? And watch it as you watch a roseflower – just look into it. When there is no conclusion your eyes are clear; clarity is attained only by those who have no conclusions. Watch, look into it, and it will become transparent, and you will come to know that it is stupid. And when you know that it is stupid, it will drop of its own accord. You don’t need to drop it.

Mrs. Weissman had her portrait painted. When it was finished, the artist presented it to her. “How do you like it?” he asked.
“It’s nice,” answered Mrs. Weissman, “but I want you to add a gold bracelet on each wrist, a pearl necklace, ruby earrings, an emerald tiara, and I want you to put a twenty-carat diamond ring on each finger.”
“But,” said the bewildered artist, “why do you want to ruin a good picture with all those gaudy trinkets?”
“My husband is running around with a young tramp,” explained Mrs. Weissman, “and when I die, I want her to go crazy looking for the jewelry.”

Just look into your jealousy and you will see how it drives you crazy. Seeing it, just seeing it, sanity arises. I am not saying renounce jealousy. Those who say renounce jealousy don’t understand a thing.
I am saying: look, watch, meditate, and if it is stupid it will drop – because how can you carry anything stupid with you? But its stupidity has to be your own experience. If it is not your own, then you will only repress, you will condemn. You will not look into it. You will throw it into the basement of your unconscious and there it will boil, there it will grow. And the growth will be more dangerous because it is growing underground. It will become a cancerous growth, it will spread all over your life. It will simply be waiting for an opportunity; it will explode sooner or later. Any day it could explode, and it will destroy you.

Paddy and his two friends, an Englishman and a Scotsman, were sentenced to five years in jail. But they were told they could take with them one thing that they badly wanted. The Englishman took a big blonde, the Scotsman had bottles of whisky, and Paddy chose packets and packets of cigarettes.
Five years went by and they were let out, one by one. The Englishman came out with his blonde, looking absolutely knackered. The Scotsman came out staggering all over the place and hiccupping. Last of all, out came Paddy, looking very frustrated. And do you know what his first words were? “Has anybody got a light?”

Enough for today.

============================================================

My body and my mind are in depression because you are not with me.
How much I love you and want you in my house!
When I hear people describe me as your bride I look sideways ashamed,
because I know that far inside us we have never met.
Then what is this love of mine?
I don’t really care about food, I don’t really care about sleep,
I am restless indoors and outdoors.
The bride wants her lover as much as a thirsty man wants water.
And how will I find someone who will take a message to the guest from me?
How restless Kabir is all the time!
How much he wants to see the guest!
Aristotle defines man as the rational animal. No definition could be more false than this. Man is the most irrational animal because man is not yet conscious. Reason is possible only as a by-product of consciousness. Man is asleep, man is dreaming. How can he be rational? He has no eyes to see, he has no awareness to know, he is utterly confused.
Man is in confusion: confusion between the body and the soul, confusion between the material and the spiritual, confusion between logic and love. Out of this confusion there is no possibility of knowing God. Out of this confusion you can go on crying and praying, but your prayer will never reach the divine, your crying is futile. Out of this confusion you will not be able to see the light. This confusion has to be dropped.
One has to become intensely aware or intensely loving. These are the only two keys to bringing man out of the state he is in: either intense awareness, which is the path of meditation; or intense, total love, which is the path of devotion.
Kabir is a devotee, he is on the path of love. He will talk of love again and again, but what he means by love has to be understood well. By love he means an intense desire to disappear into the whole. It is not the love you know of, that you talk about; it is a totally different phenomenon. Your love is an effort to dominate the other; it is a strategy to possess the other, to exploit the other. Kabir is not talking about that love. You cannot possess God, you can only be possessed by God.
To love God means to surrender, to trust, to be ready to die into him. Because dying in godliness is the beginning of a new life; it is resurrection. Love has to become such an intense flame that it burns you up, that you are not left behind, that you are consumed in it – then the guest comes.
This paradox has to be understood: the guest cannot come if the host is there; the guest can come only when the host is not there at all. In fact, that’s what host really means: absent, utterly absent, with no ego, with no idea of “I” within you, just an utter, pure emptiness; then you are a host. When the host is not there, then you really are a host. Then not even a split second is lost – the guest comes.
The guest does not come from the outside, hence there is no time gap. The dying of the host is the resurrection of the guest. You are the host, you are the guest. If you live with the “I” you remain a host, unacquainted with the guest. If you drop the “I,” you are the guest.
What matters is intensity, total intensity. Neither awareness nor love matters; the real thing is intensity. But before man can attain to such intensity, either of awareness or of love, before that total intensity can happen you have to be perfectly conscious of your unconsciousness. Man is so unconscious that he is not even conscious of his unconsciousness.

Just the other day Mulla Nasruddin was telling me: “I had eighteen bottles of whisky in my cellar, and was told by my wife to empty the contents of each and every bottle down the sink, or else. I said I would, and proceeded with the unpleasant task.
I withdrew the cork from the first bottle and poured the contents down the sink, with the exception of one glass, which I drank.
I extracted the cork from the second bottle and did likewise, with the exception of one glass, which I drank.
I then withdrew the cork from the third bottle and poured the whisky down the sink, which I drank. I pulled the cork from the fourth bottle down the sink and poured the bottle from the cork of the next and drank one sink out of it and threw the rest down the glass. I pulled the sink out of the next glass and poured the cork down the bottle. Then I corked the sink with the glass, bottled the drink and drank the pour. When I had everything emptied, I steadied the house with one hand, counted the glasses, corks, bottles and sinks with the other, which were twenty-nine, and as the house came by, I counted them again and finally had all the houses in one bottle, which I drank. I’m not under the affluence of oncohol, as some tinkle peep I am, I’m not half as thunk as you might drink. I fool so feelish I don’t know who is me, and the drunker I stand here the longer I get. Ah me!”

This is precisely the situation man is in. He is not aware of who he is, he is not aware of where he comes from, he is not aware of where he is going. He is not aware of why he is at all, why the whole of existence is. He simply goes on like a robot, doing things, managing somehow.
From birth to death, man is in a long sleep, sometimes dreaming with his eyes closed, sometimes dreaming with his eyes open, but dreaming all the same, all the time.
In this situation you cannot invite the guest. In this situation you cannot know what God is because God is nothing but the name of the totality. You don’t even know yourself, how can you know the totality? You are just a tiny being compared to this great, vast existence, you are just a dewdrop compared to the ocean of existence; you don’t even know the small part which is your being, the dewdrop – and you start inquiring about the ocean.
Hence, all philosophy is foolish. It is bound to be foolish because it inquires into the ocean without knowing the dewdrop. Religion is very sane: it starts by inquiring into the dewdrop.
The first and the most fundamental question of religion is not a question about God, but “Who am I?” Someone who starts with this question, “Who am I?” is moving in the right direction. But remember, this question should not be just an intellectual inquiry. You should not ask this question with the expectation that somebody else is going to answer it; nobody can answer it for you. You cannot find the answer in any source like the Bible, the Veda, the Koran. As far as the answer is concerned, no buddha can be any help.
Then what is the purpose of the buddhas? – to make it clear to you that your question is unanswerable, that your question has to become an inner quest. You should not look outside for the answer, you should look in for the answer. The question is hiding the answer: if you go deep down into the question you will find the answer. The answer has to be through your own realization. It cannot be through the scriptures, it cannot be through the sermons of those who are awakened. It can only be through your own awakening, through your own enlightenment; there is no other way, there is no shortcut. There is no way to get the answer cheaply. You will have to dive deep into your being, you will have to take a risk. And the greatest risk is to dive deep within yourself. Why do I call it a risk? Because when you dive deep within yourself, you come across abysmal emptiness and it frightens you. There are only two possible ways: one is superstition, blind belief; the other is doubt.
You can be superstitious and just go into it with all your superstitions – you will miss. The superstitious person can never become religious. You can believe, but your belief will be blind and if your belief is blind, you cannot open your eyes. If you begin with blindness you will end with blindness.
Or the other possibility is doubt. But if you doubt, you cannot dive in. If you believe, you dive in, but in vain. These seem to be the immediately available alternatives; the third is not so immediately clear.
The third possibility is intelligent trust – again a paradox. You have always thought of trust as needing no intelligence; you have always thought of intelligence as skeptical. You have never thought of the beautiful synthesis, the harmony, of intelligence and trust. When intelligence and trust meet, when you dive deep but fully aware, fully aware of the risk; when you dive into your being risking all, gambling, but knowing, knowing perfectly, that you may simply be entering something from which there is no return. You may die and there may be no resurrection, not even a “perhaps” in your mind; risking without motive, risking intelligently.
Seeing that life outside is futile – you have seen it, you have lived it, you have been through it, and enough is enough – you are ready to risk the inner journey intelligently. But remember, I say intelligently: the love cannot be blind. Ordinarily, that’s what your love is: it is emotional blindness, it is sentimentality, it is not intelligence. Unless love has the quality of intelligence, it is not the love that Kabir is talking about.
There are two stories to be pondered over…

There is this guy from India and he is walking along a cliff. He falls off, grabs a branch and pleads, “Is there anyone up there? Help me!”
True to form, God answers, “Trust me – let go!”
The guy lets go, and immediately falls to his death on the rocks below.
God speaks again through the clouds, “That will teach you, you stupid Indian!”

And the second story…

A Jew is walking along a cliff. He falls off, grabs a branch and pleads, “Is there anyone up there? Help me!”
God answers, “Trust me – let go!”
The Jew thinks for a minute, then lifts his eyes up to the sky and says, “Is there anyone else up there?”

These are the two alternatives available, simple alternatives. Either blindly believe or blindly doubt. But remember, God is not available to blind, superstitious people, and God is not available to doubters either. God is available to intelligent inquirers.
What is intelligent inquiry? The first requirement for it is to be a little more conscious than you are. Whatsoever you are doing, bring the quality of consciousness into it. Walking, remember “I am walking.” Not that you have to repeat these words “I am walking,” just remain alert to your walking. Drinking water, remember you are drinking. Remember it is cool, remember it is quenching your thirst. Not afterward, not when your thirst is quenched, not when it has become a past thing; but when it is on the way, when the process is happening, when the thirst is really being quenched. Not when drink has become a noun, but when it is a verb, still alive, vibrating. Feel the coolness of the water in your throat, the quenching of the thirst. Not afterward, let me repeat, not even a split second later.
Eating, working, taking a bath, whatsoever you are doing, bring a quality of awareness to it, so that awareness soaks into your being. Only then will you become a conscious lover because love is one of the deepest phenomena. Unless you are aware, conscious, in your ordinary life, you will not be conscious in your love. And conscious love is prayer. If love is not conscious it remains lust, and lust can never have anything of prayer in it. Lust is unconscious, love is conscious.

The lush staggered into the middle of Lover’s Lane, blundering into the parked convertibles and causing a minor commotion. Just then a young man appeared from the shadows, breathing heavily. “Wow!” he exclaimed. “What a dynamo. A woman like that could kill you in no time flat. She can burn a guy up.”
“So what?” slobbered the drunk.
“I’m bushed, pal,” said the young man, “want to take over from me for a while? I gotta rest up.”
“Glad to buddy, old pal,” mumbled the drunk, as he staggered over to a car parked nearby.
He had no sooner made himself comfortable than a police car drove up and the darkened convertible was flooded by the beam of a strong flashlight.
“C’mon you two,” snarled the law, “break it up.”
“But offisher,” protested the lush, “this is my wife!”
“Sorry mister, didn’t know it was your wife.”
“Neither did I until the lights went on.”

You don’t know what you are doing. You call your lust, love; you call your desire to possess, love; you call your exploitation, love. You use the other person and you call it caring. You don’t know what you are doing. You can’t know, unless you start becoming alert and aware about small things first. One has to learn swimming in shallow water.
When you go for a morning walk, try to remember: be mindful, alert. Whatsoever is happening, don’t exclude anything, be aware of it: the distant call of a bird, the car that has passed by, a child crying in some house. Be alert to everything, inclusive of all. Just be alert.
It will be difficult. Only once in a while will you be alert, and again you will become unconscious; being unconscious is such an old, ancient habit. But slowly, slowly, a part of you will be freed. In the beginning, it will only be the tip of the iceberg, but that is the beginning of a great revolution in your life. Then you can start moving your light of awareness onto deeper things. And love is the deepest thing. When love and consciousness meet, prayer arises.
These songs of Kabir are his prayer. Kabir says:
My body and my mind are in depression because you are not with me.
Man without God is a corpse; man with God is a celebration. Minus God or plus God – these are the only two ways to live your life. Minus God you are nothing but misery, plus God you are nothing but bliss. Minus God you are a negative, a black hole. Minus God you only pretend to live, you cannot live. How can there be life minus God? God is life! Yes, you go through all the empty motions, gestures; you act as if you are alive. But deep down you know you are not alive, life has not yet happened to you. Birth has happened, but not life.
Life happens only when God has happened. Then a man is twice-born. In the East we call him dwija, twice-born. Then a man really becomes a brahmin, but not by birth; nobody can be a brahmin by birth. The word brahmin does not mean a caste; it means one who has known Brahma, one who has known God, one who has become one with God, with existence. A brahmin is never born, a brahmin is resurrected. One has to first die to all that one thinks one is, then one is reborn, twice-born.
With God, your life really begins. You start pulsating on a new plane, radiating joy. Your life takes on the colors of the rainbow; you are all the colors, the whole spectrum. Your life becomes music, all the notes; you become an orchestra. Each moment goes deeper, becomes sweeter and sweeter. For the first time you start having a love affair with existence. The world remains the same and yet not the same. The trees are greener than they have ever been before, and the roses are rosier. And people are no longer ordinary people: each person represents a facet of God, a face of God.
Knowing God for the first time your life starts soaring high, you have wings. Minus God you are just crawling in the mud; plus God you can fly up to the sun. The flight of the alone to the alone becomes possible.
Kabir says:
Balam avo hamare geh re…
Oh my beloved, when are you going to enter my house, my being?
…tum bin dukhiya deh re…
Without you, my body aches, my body is nothing but pain, my body is nothing but agony. Without you I live in agony. How much longer do I have to live this way? How much longer do I have to call you forth?
My body and my mind are in depression because you are not with me. And I know why I am in such despair, in such anguish. I know perfectly well it is not because I don’t have much money, no. It is not because I am not politically powerful, no. It is not because I am not very respected, no. I have come to the basic thing: it is because you are not with me.
Have you come upon this fundamental of life? People go on thinking they will be happy if they have a little more money; or if they are more respectable, more famous, more known; or if they have more power, more prestige. People go on thinking that this is missing, that is missing, and even when they get those things, they don’t see… They again start thinking of something else. You were thinking that if you had one million rupees you would be happy; now you have, but you don’t see the futility of it. By the time you have one million, you have started thinking that unless you have ten million you are not going to be happy. What is one million, after all? Unless you have ten… And remember, this is going to happen again when you have ten million.
Your desires go on projecting into the future. The desiring mind never stops desiring. You can provide each and every thing that it desires, but it can always find more to desire; there is always more. The desire for more is the basic root of the mind.
Look back at many things you have thought: “If I have this woman, this man, I will be happy.” Now you have that woman, that man – are you happy? No, now you are thinking, “Some other woman, some other man,” and the same thing will be repeated. To keep going round this vicious circle is what I mean by stupidity; then you are not intelligent.
Kabir is showing his intelligence. He says, I have come to know that only one thing is missing in my life, and that is you – God is missing. I am minus you; that’s my misery. I am just pain and nothing else, pain all over. My body is pain, my mind is pain, I am aching all over. It is just agony. Without God there can be no ecstasy.
How much I love you and want you in my house!
Can’t you see how much I love you and want you in my house, in my temple, in my heart? He is asking: What is missing? Is my love not enough yet? Is there something wrong with my love? Is my love still lukewarm, not intense enough, not boiling at a hundred degrees? Just tell me.
When I hear people describe me as your bride I look sideways ashamed…
And I am very much ashamed because people have already started talking about me as your bride. People have started saying that I am married to God. People have started saying that I have reached the beloved, that I have found the beloved; I feel very ashamed. Yes, I have seen glimpses. I have seen you from faraway, just as you can see the Himalayan peaks from thousands of miles away on a clear day. In the sunlight you can see those virgin peaks and the snow from thousands of miles away. Just like that, I have seen a few glimpses of you; but I have not yet melted in you, and I have not yet found you in my heart. In the depths we have not met, only on the circumference. Yes, a few meetings have happened; I have been introduced to you, you have been introduced to me, that’s true. But those meetings can only be called acquaintances – and people have started describing me as your bride.
…sab koi kahe tumhari nari,
moko lagat laj re…
Everybody is talking; the news that Kabir has attained has reached many. Kabir is authentic and very true; he says: I have seen only a few glimpses, that is not attainment. In fact, I have never been in more misery than I am now. I was far happier when I had not seen your face at all because I was far more unconscious. Before I had seen you I had no idea that you are, hence there was no misery. I was not missing you at all. Since I have seen your face from far away, since a few glimpses of you have entered my being, since you have sometimes happened in the dark night of my soul like lightning, the darkness is darker than ever before. Now I know anguish because I have seen joy. Now I know agony because I have felt ecstasy. Now I know where I am – my existence is utterly useless without you.
And people have started talking of me as your bride. …I look sideways ashamed… I cannot deny that I am your bride. It is true from my side, but it has not yet happened on your side. On my side, I am ready, but you have not accepted me, you have not shown any indication that you will accept me. I cannot say that people are wrong; the marriage has happened – as far as I am concerned at least. I am married to you; I cannot live without you. I will wait for you for eternity. I cannot fall into the trap of the world again; even if I have to wait forever and ever, I will wait. On my side, I am married to you, wedded to you – but what about you? You have not yet entered my heart. What is missing?
That’s how real prayer arises: it simply says, “You are ready to come, but something must be missing in me. I desire, but my desire must be impure. I love, but there must be a shadow of lust in it.”
When I hear people describe me as your bride I look sideways ashamed,
because I know that far inside us we have never met.
Saying that needs courage for a man like Kabir: he is already known as one of the enlightened. Thousands have come to him, hundreds are his followers. It needs courage to say it so truly. He says: “Deep down, far inside us, we have never met. Yes, there has been a certain kind of meeting, circumferences have overlapped, but at the centers no meeting has happened yet. There has not yet been an orgasmic unity, we have not yet made love to each other. I have not penetrated you, you have not penetrated me; we are poles apart. And people are talking, and I feel ashamed. Then what is this love of mine? Why is this meeting in the depths not happening? What is this love of mine? Tell me.”
This is how a devotee prays. Prayer is a dialogue, a dialogue with the whole. No answer comes from the other side – it looks like a monologue to the outsider. The devotee goes on asking, inquiring, praying, demanding, complaining, thanking – no answer ever comes. If you see a devotee of Kabir’s caliber, it will look like a monologue because there is nobody else: “With whom is he talking? Has he gone mad?”
But as far as Kabir is concerned it is a dialogue, not a monologue. No response may come from the beloved, he may remain silent, but his silence is so tangible, and his presence is so tangible, it can be felt. The beloved may not say a single word, but he is there; now there is no missing it. Kabir knows God is, he has seen glimpses of him. Kabir knows that God loves him, he too has seen those few moments of joy.
But when you know that sometimes light can happen in your darkness, a great desire, a great longing, arises to end this night completely, to reach the dawn.
Then what is this love of mine?
If there is something wrong with me, tell me. If there is something missing, I will try harder. I will cleanse my heart if it is not ready to receive you. I will prepare, I will learn the art of being a host – just tell me what is missing.
I don’t really care about food, I don’t really care about sleep,
I am restless indoors and outdoors.
The devotee knows a totally different kind of restlessness from any you have known. Your restlessness is very mundane, superficial. You are restless for money, power, this and that – a better house, more money in the bank, a little more prestige in your life so you can brag that you are somebody – but you don’t know the restlessness of a devotee. He cannot say of it to anybody, he cannot show it to anybody – nobody will ever understand. He would be thought crazy, he would be thought mad.
And his restlessness is not on the surface. On the surface, Kabir will be utterly calm and quiet, but his heart is burning, his heart is on fire. Only those who know what love is, what devotion is, will understand the pain, the suffering of Kabir. Those who don’t know about the heart will see Kabir so quiet on the surface, so silent, so still – but deep down he is carrying a storm.
I am restless indoors and outdoors. I don’t care about food and I don’t care about sleep. My whole concern is you, my whole concentration is you. Day in, day out, I think only of you. I simply wait at the door, waiting for you. The wind comes and knocks on the door; I rush to open it – maybe he has come? The wind moves dry leaves on the street; I rush – maybe it is the sound of his footsteps?
I cannot sleep, Kabir says, I cannot eat. I am so full of you that there is no space left in me for anything else. Still something is missing. What?
The bride wants her lover as much as a thirsty man wants water.
Just like a fish thrown onto the bank, I am thirsty for you, dying for you, but you have still not arrived. And you cannot be wrong, so I must be wrong. It seems that my thirst is still not enough, my longing is not intense enough. I have not yet prayed and called you. It seems my host is still unworthy of receiving you.
And how will I find someone who will take a message to the guest from me?
I go on calling and you don’t answer, and sometimes I doubt whether my words are reaching you, whether you are hearing me, whether you care about me. Yes, suspicions arise, doubts arise. There are moments when I start losing hope, when hopelessness settles into me, when the despair is so much that I start thinking, “If there was somebody to take a message to you…”
Kabir is saying: Where can I find a master who can become a bridge between you and me; whom I can tell, and trust that the message will be delivered to you; and who can answer on your behalf? Where can I find such a master?
The story of Kabir is tremendously beautiful. Nothing is absolutely certain, but it is said that he was born into a Mohammedan family, abandoned by his parents, and then brought up by a Hindu family. So there was always that suspicion, that he was brought up by Hindus but born a Mohammedan. He knocked on many so-called gurus’ doors and they would not accept him because they thought he was a Mohammedan; or even if he was not, his birth was at least suspicious, uncertain. The parents had simply thrown the child onto the riverbank and somebody found him and brought him up. Why was he abandoned? – maybe he was an illegal child. Nobody would accept him.
His name also showed that he was a Mohammedan; Kabir is one of the names of God given by Sufis. Sufis have a hundred names for God. Ninety-nine can be communicated verbally, the hundredth cannot: it is understood only in deep silence between the master and the disciple. One of those ninety-nine names is Kabir; it literally means “the great, the vast, the infinite.” Kabir is certainly not a Hindu name.
So, his birth was suspicious, his name was Mohammedan. Who would accept him? All the so-called masters were afraid. He was rejected.
Then Kabir played a trick. He wanted to become the disciple of a very famous master, the great Ramananda, but he was afraid to go to him – maybe Ramananda would not accept him, just as the others had not. And once he had been rejected it would be very difficult to turn the no into a yes; so he played a trick.
Ramananda used to go to the Ganges in Varanasi to take his morning bath, early, when the sun had not yet risen and it was still dark. Kabir went there and slept on a step where he knew Ramananda would pass. It was dark, and Ramananda’s feet touched Kabir – and Kabir clung to Ramananda’s feet. Ramananda said, “Hey Ram! My God! Who are you? What are you doing here?”
Kabir said, “Forget about that – you have given me the mantra ‘Hey Ram.’ You have initiated me, I am your disciple now.”
Now Ramananda could not go back on his word. He said, “That’s true, this is your mantra, ‘Hey Ram, O God,’ and you are my disciple.” It was only later on, when the sun rose, that Ramananda became aware that it was Kabir.
That is how Kabir got initiated into disciplehood. Normally, it is the master who creates a device to initiate the disciple, but in Kabir’s case everybody knew about him, that he was knocking on every door asking to be initiated. So it was the disciple who created a device to be initiated by the master.
Kabir says it is very difficult to find a master. And how will I find someone who will take a message to the guest from me? This song must have been sung before he met Ramananda.
How restless Kabir is all the time!
How much he wants to see the guest!

…hai koi aisa par-upakari,
pivson kahe sunay re…
The original is: Is there anybody in the whole world who has any compassion for this poor man? Because I have a message to be delivered to my beloved. Is there somebody who is compassionate enough, who can deliver my message to God? …pivson kahe sunay re… Somebody who can go to the beloved; somebody who knows the beloved, knows his address, knows the way. I don’t know his address, I don’t know the way, I don’t know his house, where he resides. I go on calling for him, not knowing in which direction to call, not knowing what name to call. Is there somebody in the world compassionate enough to take my message to my beloved? To just tell him, “There is a madman dying in deep love for you.”
And if there is any fault I must drop, just tell me, and I will drop it. I am ready to risk all, but I don’t know what to drop. How restless Kabir is all the time! Cannot someone go and tell God how restless I am? My heart is burning, I am constantly crying and weeping.
…ab to behal Kabir bhayo hai,
bin dekhe jiv jaye re.
Now, says Kabir, the situation is this: things have come to such a point that if you don’t show up I will die, trust me. I cannot remain alive any longer without you. …bin dekhe jiv jaye re. If I cannot see you, I cannot live anymore. I am finished. Either you come, or I am going to die. I am breathing my last.
…ab to behal Kabir bhayo… Kabir has come to such a state that only death seems to be possible. “Either you appear, or I disappear.”
And it is at this point that the guest appears, at this point that the meeting happens. In fact it is not right to call it a meeting because a meeting needs two, and this meeting happens only when you are not.
In another song Kabir sings – it must have been composed after the meeting – he says: “In the beginning I used to seek and search for you, and I was at a loss, I was continuously frustrated. I used to seek and search for you and there was no sign of you. Now you seek and search for me, and you will not find me anywhere. Herat herat he sakhi rahya Kabir herai…”
Seeking and seeking, searching and searching for the beloved… A moment came – the beloved was not found but the seeker disappeared. And the moment the seeker disappeared, the sought was found because it is the seeker that is hiding the sought.
The seeker is the last citadel of the ego, the very last citadel of the ego, where the ego hides. It becomes the seeker, the great seeker; it becomes the devotee. Remember, the ego can take any form, and the subtlest form is that of a devotee, a humble devotee, a surrendered devotee. Beware of the subtle ways of the ego. It has to die totally. One has to come to a point where one finds oneself not, where one is just utter nothingness; that is the purpose of the meeting. When you are not, godliness is.
How restless Kabir is all the time! How much he wants to see the guest! This longing to see the guest, this desire to see the guest, brings you a long way. But finally, ultimately, even this desire has to be dropped.
There is a very famous story about another mystic, a contemporary of Kabir, Sheik Farid…

Farid was going to the river to take his bath. A young man asked him, “Can you tell me how to find God?”
Farid looked at the young man with his very penetrating eyes; he looked for a long time, and the young man started feeling frightened. And then Farid said, “Come along with me to the river. First take a bath, and if I get the opportunity I will answer while we are bathing, or if not, then later on.”
The young man was puzzled: “What does he mean? I have asked a simple question – how to find God? – and he is talking in riddles. Bathing in the river? If he gets the opportunity he will answer? Why can’t he answer right now?”
But the way the man had looked into his eyes – he had a magnetic attraction. And, knowing that the ways of the mystics are mysterious, strange, he felt like going with him. He was a little afraid, scared, but still the attraction was strong enough that he followed. He said to himself: “Let’s take a risk – what can he do?”
They both went into the river, but when the young man dived in Farid caught hold of him under the water and wouldn’t allow him to come up; he forced his head down, deeper and deeper.
Farid was strong, and the young man cannot have been because strong people don’t ask such questions, such philosophical questions: How to find God? What is God? These inquiries are philosophical; fragile people ask them. Really strong people, rather than asking here and there, start the journey; rather than becoming philosophical they become religious.
The young man was dying, but when you are dying, suddenly a great energy arises in you. When there is such a risk, you cannot afford to be half-hearted. His whole energy, which had never before been available, became available to him.
You know only the first layer of your energy, which is very ordinary; it is enough for day-to-day work, then it is exhausted. You need sleep to become refreshed again. The second layer is the emergency layer; it arises only in an emergency. For example, if somebody is coming at you with a bayonet, or a lion is following you in the forest, then you run. No Olympic runner can compete with you – and if you don’t know how to run, it will come, it will happen. When your life is in danger the second layer becomes available. And when your life is really in danger, totally in danger, absolutely in danger, the third layer becomes available; the third layer is inexhaustible. The third layer is already joined with existence, it is rooted in existence. And so it was the case with the young man…
Farid was a strong man and he was not leaving the young man alone, he was forcing him down and down. When the first layer was exhausted, Farid suddenly felt there was great strength; the young man was becoming stronger and it was difficult even for Farid to keep him down. And soon Farid became aware that the third layer had now become available, and the young man threw him off as if Farid were just a toy. The young man came out, very angry, obviously, and said, “Are you mad or something? I ask a religious question and you were going to kill me. Are you a murderer? And people think that you are a great sage!”
Farid said, “We can discuss those things later. Right now, lest you forget, let me ask you a question: ‘What happened when I went on forcing you down and down into the water?’”
The young man said, “What happened?”
“Were there many thoughts in your head?” Farid asked.
“Many thoughts? There was only one thought – how to get out.”
“Was it a thought or was it a feeling?” Farid asked.
And the young man said, “It was a feeling, you are right, it was not a thought. I was not verbalizing it; it was not in my head, it was in my heart. It was just a feeling – now I am verbalizing it.”
“And how long did it stay?”
“A moment came when that too disappeared,” the young man said. “You are right again: there was no feeling, no thought. But something was happening, I don’t know what or from where. I was not doing it, it was happening – a great uprush of energy from some unknown source. Now I can look back, I can express it. At that very moment I was conscious, absolutely conscious. I have never been so conscious – because I have never been in such danger before. I was alert, absolutely alert, but still there was no thought, no feeling, not even a desire to save myself. In fact there was no me. I had disappeared, but something was happening beyond me, something transcendental.”
Farid said, “Now you know the answer – this is the way to find God. When you are not, the transcendental descends into you. Now you can go. Never ask anybody again, you know the key: let God become such a problem, such a quest, that your life is at stake.”

That’s what happened to Kabir. He says: …ab to behal Kabir bhayo… Now, closer and closer, the moment is approaching when I know my death is an absolute certainty. Now it is a question of either–or: either you or death. All other alternatives have disappeared. Everything has been narrowed down to two things: death or God.
Death or God: …ab to behal Kabir bhayo hai, bin dekhe jiv jaye re. If you don’t appear I will be gone, and then it will be too late for you to come. And then you will repent that one who had prayed his whole life, who had devoted his all to you; one who was so surrendered, who was so deep in trust, died – and you didn’t appear.
The song ends at this point because beyond this nothing can be said. Kabir died, and God appeared. The host disappeared and the guest came in. The guest waits for you to die.
That is the meaning of the Christian symbol of the cross. Jesus says to his disciples: “If you want to follow me, you will have to carry your own cross on your own shoulders.” Everyone has to carry their own cross, everyone has to prepare for their own ultimate death. I don’t mean physical death, remember. Physical death has happened to you many times; millions of times you have died physically. That is not true death because the mind continues, enters another womb, starts another game; again the whole story is repeated. You go on moving in circles; that is not true death.
True death is known only by the devotee who comes to the point where he cannot live without God, where it becomes impossible to live without God. When this impossibility arises, that one cannot live without God, the death is so deep that nobody can help you. This is what Jesus means by “carrying your own cross.” Of course, nobody else can carry it for you. This death is so much of the interior that nobody can approach it from the outside. You cannot be murdered, you can only commit suicide – because of this death, because of this internal disappearance, because of this subjective annihilation, cessation.
Kabir died, Kabir disappeared – and the guest was always there; it was only the presence of Kabir that was preventing the guest from entering.
One of the greatest poets that India has given birth to in this century was Rabindranath Tagore. He has written a memoir of tremendous beauty and significance:

He was staying in a boat on a river; he loved his boat and the river. It was a full-moon night. In the small cabin of his boat he was pondering over one of the ancientmost questions that all the poets have pondered over: What is beauty? He was looking into books, ancient and modern; he had a great library in his cabin, all about aesthetics. What is beauty? That had been his lifelong concern – what is beauty? – because he had the feeling that God is beauty; not truth, but beauty.
Truth looks dry, truth looks logical. The very word connotes some head trip; truth seems to belong to the head. Hence Rabindranath used to say that God is not truth but beauty. Beauty is a feeling, it is not a logical phenomenon; it is of the heart. It is closer to love than logic.
This had been his lifelong meditation: What is beauty? And on that night also he had been thinking about it, looking into books, finding definitions. Half the night passed. He was completely oblivious to the full moon, he was completely oblivious to the silence outside, the absolutely silent river and the full moon and the beauty of the full moon. And the whole river was transformed into silver, the silent trees meditating on the banks, and only once in a while the distant call of a cuckoo. But he was completely oblivious to it all.
Then, feeling tired, exhausted, he closed his books, blew out the small candle, and suddenly a great revelation happened. As he blew out the small candle, from the windows, from the doors, from every side, the moonlight came in, started dancing in the cabin. The candle had been burning and the moon had not been coming in. The moment the candle was blown out the moonlight entered.
That sudden change – for a moment Rabindranath was in such awe. He says, “I knew in that moment what beauty is. I cannot say it to anybody, I cannot define it yet, but in that moment I knew what beauty is – the utter silence, the distant call of the cuckoo, suddenly the moonlight entering.”
He went out. It was sheer beauty. The whole of existence was celebrating. The river was just silver, the whole sky open with just a few white clouds floating.
He wrote in his diary, “How foolish I am. I was looking in books for the definition of beauty, and beauty was standing at my door. And a small candle prevented the great moon from entering. On this night, exactly like that, I felt my small ego and its pale light preventing the guest, God, from entering.”

Blow this candle out, blow it out. Let there be no ego, and suddenly, from every nook and corner, the guest enters – and you will know what beauty is, you will know what God is. That is exactly what must have happened to Kabir.
He does not say so in this song; in another song elsewhere he says: There was a time when I used to go on religious pilgrimages in search of God. I went to Kashi, I went to Mathura, I went to this and that temple. I went to every place wherever I heard God is, and I never found him anywhere. Then one day, Kabir disappeared. Since then, God comes following me wherever I go, calling, “Kabir, Kabir. Where are you going?” He follows me like a shadow. And I don’t care. Because I am no more, how can I care? He goes on calling, “Kabir, Kabir.” I used to call him and he never answered – why should I answer now? Tit for tat!
Meditate over Kabir’s beautiful songs. They are very precious, the more so because Kabir is not a learned man at all. He says: “Masi kagad chhuyo nahin – I have never touched paper and ink.” And that is exactly so: he cannot write, he cannot read. He has no idea of the Vedas and the Koran and the Bible, but what he says contains all the Vedas and all the Korans and all the Bibles. Not knowing a single word of the Upanishads, his poetry contains all of them. He is not a learned man but he is a wise man; not knowledgeable, but he knows. And he has come up the hard way. In fact there is no other way – no cheap way, no shortcut.
If you meditate on Kabir, slowly, slowly, a great desire, a flame of longing in your heart will arise because you also will be able to see that nothing in the world can ever satisfy you except the guest. Minus God you are a corpse, plus God you are a celebration.
Enough for today.

============================================================

The first question:
Osho,
You, the fountain of love, our source is in thee.
Loving thy will our spirit is free.
This beautiful day that all of us see.
The hope of the world is love.
Love is not only the hope of the world, but the only hope. Up to now man has lived an absolutely loveless life. All the societies and the cultures and the religions that have existed on earth have talked about love, but have lived a very loveless existence. There has been much talk about love in the past, but the structure that societies have created is basically against love. Society is geared for war, and a society that is geared for war can only talk about love, not live it.
We have now come to the peak of this ugly, stupid structure of hatred. We have come to the point where man has to either change totally or die. The new man can only be born by having a new heart, a new soul – and the flavor of that soul will be love, and the poetry of that heart will be love. A society that lives without love is competitive, ambitious; obsessed with money, power, prestige. A society that lives without love lives through beliefs. Beliefs divide people, and all divisions breed war. A society that lives without love lives a very lustless existence because without love there is no splendor in life, no significance. Without love no song arises in the heart of man.
We have come to the point – or are coming to it, approaching it every day – that by the end of this century man will have to choose either total destruction or revolution. Not a political or social revolution, but a revolution of the heart. The turning point is coming closer every day; you must be prepared for it.
Sannyas has to become the herald for a new world, the first ray of the dawn. Man is reaching toward total war; all the preparations are there to commit global suicide. This is what your history has brought you to. All the Alexanders and all the Napoleons and all the Stalins and all the Hitlers and all the Maos have been working for centuries and centuries. Now their dream is going to be fulfilled: we can destroy this whole earth within seconds. Destruction has reached its peak; unless creativity also reaches its peak man cannot be saved.
And to me, love is nothing but the birth of creativity in you. By love I mean an overflowing heart. Love to me is not only a relationship; the relationship that we call love is a faraway, distant echo of the real thing.
The real thing is not a relationship but a state; one is not in love, but one is love. Whenever I talk about love, remember this: I am talking about the state of love. Yes, a relationship is perfectly good, but the relationship is going to be false if you have not attained the state of love. Then the relationship is not only a pretension, it is a dangerous pretension because it can go on befooling you; it can go on giving you the sense that you know what love is – and you don’t know. Love is basically a state of being; one is not in love, one is love.
And that love arises not by falling in love with somebody. That love arises by going in – not by falling, but by rising, soaring upward, higher than yourself. It is a kind of surpassing. A man is love when his being is silent; it is the song of silence. A Buddha is love, a Jesus is love – not in love with a particular person, but simply love. Their very climate is love. It is not addressed to anybody in particular, it is spreading in all directions. Whosoever comes close to a buddha will feel it, will be showered by it, will be bathed in it. And it is unconditionally so.
Love makes no conditions, no ifs, no buts. Love never says, “Fulfill these requirements, then I will love you.” Love is like breathing; when it happens you simply are love. It does not matter who comes close to you, a sinner or a saint. Whosoever comes close to you starts feeling the vibe of love, rejoices. Love is unconditional giving – but only those who have are capable of giving.
One of the most mysterious things about man is that he goes on giving things which he doesn’t have. You go on giving love and you don’t have it in the first place, and you go on asking for love from others who also don’t have it – beggars begging from beggars.
Love first has to happen in the deepest core of your being. It is the quality of being alone, happily alone, joyously alone. It is the quality of being a no-mind, of being silent. Contentless consciousness is the space, the context, in which love arises in you.
And so much love arises in you it is unbearable. The pleasure is so unbearable that it almost becomes pain. It is heavy like clouds full of rain; they have to shower, they have to rain, they have to unburden themselves. When love arises in the silent heart, it has to be shared, it has to be given; you are helpless.
And the person you give your love to is not obliged to you in any way. In fact, you are obliged to them because they help to unburden you, they share something that was too much for you. And the economics of love are: the more you give, the more you have because in your silent being you are joined with the oceanic, the divine source of all. And you can go on sharing; more and more goes on flowing through you, welling up.
Yes, you are right, love is the only hope of the world. And we are coming close to the turning point: either total war or total love. This is a question of either–or, there is no third alternative. There is nothing like a compromise possible now, you cannot be in the middle. Man has to choose. It is a question of life and death: war is death, love is life.
By creating you here, by creating sannyasins here, I am creating a new kind of space. This is the beginning of a totally new man. Hence the old traditions will be unable to understand what is happening here; the experiment is so new they don’t have any criterion. Yes, in the past, once in a while, men like Buddha, Kabir, Krishna, Christ, Zarathustra, have happened, but they are only individuals. Now, only individuals won’t do; only a buddha here and there won’t be of much help. The world has gone too far into hate. The world is so full of hate that it is almost like an ocean of hatred, and a buddha will be just a spoonful of sugar – it won’t change the taste of the ocean. We need thousands of buddhas.
Hence I am not interested in Christians, I am interested only in Christs. I am not interested in Jainas, I am interested only in Mahaviras. I am not interested in Buddhists, I am interested only in Buddhas. My effort here is not to create a following, not to create believers, but to create individuals, lovers, meditators who can stand on their own; and each one can become a light. The night is going to become darker and darker every day and we will need millions of lights around the world, millions of people who are capable of love – unconditionally, without asking for anything in return – and who are so silent and so blissful that wherever they are they will be able to dissipate darkness.
Yes, love is the hope of the world, the only hope.

The second question:
Osho,
When dreaming, something is constantly telling me that I have to die. I remember no other dreams. What is happening?
Meditate first over this small anecdote…

The young man had been keeping company with a girl for over two years, but still had given no indication of serious intentions.
“I had a strange dream last night,” he remarked one day. “I dreamed I proposed to you. What that is a sign of, I wonder?”
“It’s a sign you’ve got more sense asleep than awake.”

And that’s exactly my answer to you: you have got more sense asleep than awake. In fact, the whole of psychoanalysis is based on the understanding that people are more intelligent while dreaming than while they are awake.
Why has this strange thing happened? People should be more intelligent when they are awake than when they are dreaming. There is a reason: society can make an impression on your waking mind; it has not yet been able to make an impression on your dreaming mind. Society has destroyed your waking mind, distorted it, polluted it, disfigured it; it is almost unrecognizable now from what it could have been naturally. So much has been pruned, cut, so much has been repressed, so much has been imposed from the outside, that you don’t know what you would have been if society had not interfered.
But your unconscious, your dreaming mind, is still out of range of being grabbed by society. But it will not be for long, there are people who are working to grab your unconscious mind too, remember. In Soviet Russia particularly, they have been experimenting for at least twenty years on how to influence your dreaming, sleeping mind – and they have succeeded. They have succeeded enough for you to need to be alert, to beware.
In Russia now, they have found that a person can be taught even while he is asleep and dreaming. Earphones are put on the person and messages are given, in a very, very, silent way, in a subliminal way, so that his sleep is not disturbed. He continues to sleep yet his mind goes on receiving messages. You can teach new languages, mathematics, history, philosophy, anything, and he will remember in the morning. In fact, it seems to work far better than ordinary schooling because in ordinary schooling you have to go on repeating the same thing again and again; when it is repeated often, only then does it go a little deeper. But when you are asleep your deep mind is available.
It is okay to teach mathematics and science and history – but politicians cannot stop there. They will teach communism, fascism – it is bound to happen. They will teach Gandhism, they will teach Christianity, Hinduism, Islam – it is bound to happen. Once the politicians have got the means to influence your sleeping mind they will not leave you alone.
At least right now you are free to dream; soon the danger is that you will not be. The government will go on influencing your dreams; it will allow you to dream only certain dreams, it will create dreams in you. In a communist country you will not be able to dream a capitalist dream; even in a dream you will not have a car of your own, it won’t be allowed.
And if your unconscious becomes available to the politicians, man is utterly destroyed. It should not be allowed. This is far more dangerous than atomic bombs because the atom bomb and the hydrogen bomb can only destroy your body, but these new techniques of behaviorist psychology can destroy your psychology. Right now at least you have some privacy, but politicians are not willing to give you even that much; they want to interfere, they want to poke into your dreams. Up to now it has not happened much; they have succeeded with experimentation, but it has not yet been used on a wide scale.
You say, “When dreaming, something is constantly telling me that I have to die.” That is the voice of your inner being. It has nothing to do with your physical death, it has something to do with your psychological death. It has something to do with the death of the ego.
It happens to every meditator: the more you meditate, the more your inner voice says, “Let the ego die.” The more you meditate, the more you become aware that a certain death is going to happen. And you only know one kind of death, so naturally you misinterpret: you think, “I am going to die.” You are not going to die. Only the “I,” the ego, the personality, is going to die, is going to disappear. Your dream is giving you a very significant message.
And you say, “I remember no other dreams. What is happening?” This dream is not an ordinary dream, it is something extraordinary. It is not just the rubbish of the mind.
Ninety-nine percent of your dreams consist of rubbish, rubbish that you gather in the day, rubbish that you carry on chewing over in the night. They are a reflection of your day, they have nothing special in them. That’s why psychoanalysis takes so many years – to find a gem in the rubbish takes time. There is so much rubbish that it takes two, three years for the psychoanalyst to find something significant, sort it out, figure out where you are, what you are.
But in meditation it can happen very quickly because in meditation you go directly. You don’t search in the rubbish, you simply dive deep into your being to where the diamond is, where the lotus paradise is.
You are hearing something of your inner voice. It is not really a dream, it is far truer than any truth you have yet known. It is the voice of your soul, it is existence speaking to you. Listen, follow – help the ego to die. Become absolutely nonexistent as far as the ego is concerned.
And in the death of the ego love is born, godliness is born, light is born. In the death of the ego you are transformed; all misery disappears as if it had never existed. Your life right now is a nightmare. When the ego dies, nightmares disappear and a great sweetness and a subtle joy arise in your being, for no reason at all. You cannot explain it to anybody, you cannot explain it to yourself either. It is unexplainable, mysterious. But who cares for the explanation? When you are bathed, when you are rejoicing, when your being is in a dance, who cares?
Only when you are suffering do you ask, “Why?” You ask when you are ill, you never ask when you are healthy. You never ask your physician, “Why am I healthy?” When you are ill, you certainly ask “Why am I ill? Why this headache, why this stomachache?” But when you are perfectly healthy you don’t go to the physician to ask, “Why am I healthy?” Health is natural, so is bliss; misery is unnatural. Misery is pathology, illness, disease.
Let the ego die. The time has come, and your inner voice is saying, “Don’t cling to it. Let go.”

The third question:
Osho,
If I should meet Osho walking down the road, should I kill him?
Certainly. That’s why I never walk down the road, you know.
But you don’t understand; you have asked the question, but you don’t understand the meaning of it at all. This is a message only for disciples, and you are not yet a disciple, you are not yet a sannyasin.
This is a Zen way of saying something of immense value. It is a Zen saying: If you meet the Buddha on the way, kill him. But Buddha is dead, and has been dead for twenty-five centuries. Where can you meet him, on what way? And how can you kill someone who has been dead for twenty-five centuries?
It has a totally different meaning: it is a message to the disciple who loves Buddha, who loves him so much that there is a possibility that Buddha may become his last barrier – because of his love, because he is a disciple, because he is a sannyasin; because he meditates, goes deeper and deeper into his being and feels more and more grateful toward Buddha.
At the last moment even the master has to be left behind – at the last moment. This is something inner, remember; it has nothing to do with the outer – this is something inner. All your thoughts disappear, then only one thought remains – the thought of your master. At the very last you have to say good-bye to the master too.
And it is very difficult to say good-bye. You owe so much to the master: he has been your source, your transformation, he has been your nourishment, your life, he has brought you along the long way. And now to say good-bye to the person who has been your guide, your friend? Now to say good-bye to him who has been a constant companion in the dark night of the soul; to say good-bye to him when the dawn is coming? It seems impossible. And the disciple, at the last moment, starts clinging to the idea of the master.
But that becomes a barrier. The master himself will give you a push, and if you don’t feel the push then he will give you a kick in the pants – because you have to go, you have to go into the unknown.
The master says to you, I say to you, “If you meet me on the way, kill me.” But what way is implied? You will not meet me on MG Road. What way? If you go inward, on the inner way, on the inward journey, at the last checkpoint I am waiting for you.
And it will be difficult to say good-bye, it has always been difficult to say good-bye. Hence the statement is to just kill the master, so there is no need to even say good-bye; kill the master so there is no need to look back; kill the master so you can now be left totally alone, with not even the shadow of the master with you. And this is done in great gratefulness, in great gratitude.
But this is not for you. First become a sannyasin, a disciple; start moving inward – only then can you meet me. You have not yet met me, even outwardly, how can you meet me inwardly? You have not yet come closer to me, how can you be in a state of clinging to me? You are far away, you are distant, you are avoiding. You have not even said good morning, so what is the point of saying good-bye? First become a disciple. Move on the inward way, let me help you to the ultimate point, and then certainly, if you meet me on the inner way, kill me.
But it happens that people only understand according to their own ideas. You have not understood this Zen koan. And it is not, remember again, it is not, that the disciple kills the master in anger: he kills him in gratitude. In fact, he kills him because the master orders him to kill him; he simply follows the commandment – crying, weeping, with tears in his eyes. And even when he has killed, the gratitude remains.
Do you know this story?…

The famous Zen master, Ikkyu, was staying in a temple on a very cold night. There were many wooden Buddhas in the temple, so he brought two, three Buddhas over and made a good fire, and enjoyed.
In the middle of the night, what with the fire and the smoke and the crackling of the wood, the priest awoke: “What is happening? What is going on?” He saw this monk – who was a stranger, who had asked for, and been given, shelter – and what had he done? Three Buddhas gone. Naturally, the priest was in a rage. He said, “Are you mad or something? You have burnt three Buddhas.”
Ikkyu took his staff and started searching for something in the ashes. There was nothing left now, just ashes, but he was searching. The priest asked, “What are you searching for?”
“Buddha’s bones,” Ikkyu said. “I am searching for the flowers, for the bones of Buddha.”
In India, in the East, the bones are called flowers – symbolically. Now the priest laughed. He said, “You are really mad. How can you find flowers, bones, from the wooden Buddhas?”
Ikkyu said, “So you are not as stupid as you look. Bring a few more Buddhas because the night is long and it is cold. If you know that these are only wooden Buddhas, then what is there to fear? We can enjoy. My buddha inside is feeling cold. And what do you think – should I care more about the living buddha or the wooden Buddha?”
It was too dangerous to keep this man inside the temple, and the priest had to go to sleep, so he said, “Please get out, otherwise you might burn more Buddhas. Simply get out. I don’t want anything to do with this nonsense.”
The priest threw Ikkyu out into the cold night. While he was being thrown out Ikkyu said, “What are you doing? On such a cold night, are you throwing out a buddha, a living buddha, to protect the wooden Buddhas?”
But the priest wouldn’t listen, he closed the door in Ikkyu’s face.
In the morning when the priest went out of the temple he found another miracle happening. Just by the side of the road there was a milestone. Ikkyu had gathered some flowers from the roadside and was offering them to the milestone. He was bowing down and saying, “Buddham sharanam gachchhami, sangham sharanam gachchhami, dhammam sharanam gachchhami – I take shelter at the feet of the Buddha, I take shelter in your commune, my lord, I take shelter in the dhamma, the law that you have taught us.”
The priest said, “What are you doing? During the night you burnt three Buddhas, and now you are worshipping the milestone as a Buddha!”
And Ikkyu said, “If you have gratitude you can show it anywhere. If you don’t have it, even thousands of wooden Buddhas cannot create it.”

“If you have gratitude you can show it anywhere.” Now this is a man of Zen. If you understand Ikkyu, then you will understand this statement: on the one hand he burned, on the other hand he worshipped.
The masters who used to tell their disciples, “If you meet the Buddha on the way, kill him,” were worshipping the Buddha every day – morning, afternoon, evening. They were prostrating themselves before the Buddha. And many times the disciples asked, “Sir, you say, ‘If you meet the Buddha on the way, kill him.’ Then why do you worship him?”
And the master would say, “Because he is the only master in the world, Buddha is the only master in the world who helps you to get rid of him. Hence the gratitude.”
You have not understood the statement. These statements have a very different meaning than is apparent. To understand these statements you will have to become a little grown-up. As far as these statements are concerned, you are like children…

A teacher first explained to her class that the four basic elements of successful fiction were religion, royalty, sex and mystery. Then she asked them to write their first novel. After about five minutes little Peter walked up to the teacher’s desk and said, “Teacher, I’ve finished.”
“In five minutes?” said the teacher. “Are you sure you have included all the four basic elements: religion, royalty, sex and mystery?”
“Yes, I have,” said the boy. “I’ll read it to you:
‘Holy Moses!’ said the princess. ‘Pregnant again? I wonder who done it this time?’”

The novel was finished, and the four basic elements were all there: ‘“Holy Moses!” said the princess. ‘Pregnant again? I wonder who done it this time?’” To understand these great statements you will need a more grown-up mind.
Yes certainly, if you meet me on the way, kill me. But first, please, be on the way – where I am waiting for you, to be killed by you.
And you don’t know another thing which is not really ever said. This statement is only the half of it; the other half, the first half, is missing. Before you can ever kill me, I will kill you. That’s how you will enter the way.

The fourth question:
Osho,
My wise Shiatsu teacher at home told us, “You cannot fight against the Devil, you can only play with him.” I feel that this could help me but I do not understand it completely. Would you speak about it?
It is a beautiful statement and of great significance. You cannot fight against the Devil because if you fight with the Devil you take him very seriously, and to take the Devil very seriously is to believe in him.
The Devil is created by your seriousness about him, your seriousness is his nourishment. It is by being serious about the Devil that you pay him respect, that you feed him. And the more serious you are about him, the more frightened you are; the more frightened you are the more he will scare you. The Devil must not to be taken seriously at all, but if you fight you cannot avoid taking him seriously.
How are you going to fight with the Devil? Where will you find him? – you will find him within yourself, you will condemn some part of your being as the Devil and you will fight with it. And that is like your right hand fighting with your left hand, condemning; condemning the left as the Devil. And that’s how people think: right is right and left is wrong.
The left hand is as much you as your right hand. You will divide yourself: your head will start fighting with your heart, your mind will start fighting with your body. You will become fragmentary, you will become divided, there will be a great civil war within you. You will condemn sex, you will condemn anger, greed, you will condemn a thousand and one things – but they are part of you. The more you condemn them, the more power you give to them because whenever you condemn something you become focused on it – and to be attentive to something is to give power to it. Whenever you become too attentive toward something you become hypnotized by it.
The person who is against sex becomes obsessed with it. He continuously thinks about it because he has to be alert, on guard; otherwise the enemy will defeat him. And for twenty-four hours you are on guard against whom? – against your own energy. So you are split; and to be split is to be in misery, and to be split is to be poor because the energy dissipates. To be in inner conflict is to be in anguish, agony. Bliss means being integrated.
Where is the Devil? – it is some condemned part of you. And you cannot cut it out because it is so deeply a part of you that there is no possibility of separating it from your self. So you can go on fighting, but you will never win.
The statement is beautiful: “You cannot fight against the Devil, you can only play with him.” And that’s what I am teaching you here: be playful, nonserious. Yes, even with sex, anger, greed, everything that has been condemned down the ages, be playful with it. And then the miracle happens: if you are playful, the Devil starts evaporating because it is seriousness that gives him shape and form and solidity. When you become playful about him – when you are not on guard, when you are not fighting – he is being starved; when you are playful you take the very earth from underneath his feet.
Try being playful with anything and you will see the miracle happening. Be playful with sex and soon you will be beyond sex. That’s the whole secret of Tantra: just be playful about it, don’t take it so seriously, it is nothing to be worried about. It is not a problem to be solved, it is your energy to be understood – and not only understood but reabsorbed.
If you can absorb your own sexual energy you will be far richer than you are, far stronger than you are. If you can absorb your anger into yourself, your greed into yourself, you will no longer be a schizophrenic; your whole pathology will disappear. You will be whole and healthy, and you will have a totally different feeling of well-being. You will be surrounded by sunlight. You will be sunlit. And wherever you go you will carry peace around with you – very tangible, very substantial – because there will be no conflict in you.
Being playful is one of the great secrets of inner transformation. Learn to be playful. If all seriousness disappears from your life, you are religious.
But this is not what is ordinarily understood by a religious person. A religious person becomes very, very serious. He looks at you as if you are a sinner condemned to go to hell, doomed. He walks erect, with great pride. You can see in his eyes that he knows that he is “holier than thou,” higher than thou, that he is saved and you are condemned. So of course he becomes very serious; his going to the church, to the temple, his prayer, his ritual, are all very serious affairs. He does not take it nonseriously, playfully.
But you cannot know what prayer is if you don’t know what playfulness is. Real religion teaches you playfulness – sincerity of course, but seriousness no; authenticity of course, but seriousness no.
You have come to the right place, that’s what we are doing here. This whole space that is being created here is one of playfulness. People are working, but the work has no seriousness about it, no tension about it. They are enjoying it; that is prayer, that is worship. They are continuously working; nowhere else can you find so much work going on, and with such nonseriousness, with such playfulness.
Just a few days ago I told you that there are three hundred people working here. I was wrong –I am not very reliable with information, even about my own ashram. I never go out because I am afraid somebody may kill me, fools are everywhere. It is perfectly okay with Buddha if you kill him because he is already dead.
Laxmi told me that there are not three hundred, but seven hundred people working; and a hundred waiting because there is no space for them. How can there be enough space in such a small – six-acre – piece of land? Seven hundred people working – more than a hundred per acre. But you don’t feel crowded because there are no serious people around. Otherwise, one serious person is enough to make the place seem crowded. A hundred playful persons don’t make a crowd; they remain individuals, they don’t create a crowd. You can see the joy and the celebratory mood.
This I call true religion – playfulness, lovingness, cheerfulness.

The fifth question:
Osho,
How long does this stupid sex continue to haunt one? I am almost sixty and it is still there.
Sex has nothing to do with age, you can be six hundred and it will still be there. It has something to do with awareness, not with age. Remember, just by growing old you don’t grow up. You may be sixty physiologically, but you may just be nearabout twelve, thirteen, or at the most fourteen psychologically, hence this hang-up. A person who is psychologically fourteen is bound to be haunted by sex, and people are stuck at somewhere near thirteen, fourteen.
The average mental age of humanity is twelve. It is unbelievable that people get stuck so early. What happens? And why at just nearabout twelve, thirteen, fourteen? – because that is the time when sex ripens in you, and no society wants you to go beyond that point. Every society wants you to remain sexually starved because a sexually starved person is very useful to society – to this ill society. A sexually starved person can be channeled in any direction very easily because he is boiling within. You can make him go after money: then money will be his sex, then his whole starved sexual energy will move toward money. Then money will be his beloved, his God, and for his whole life he will run after money. And naturally, sex will haunt him because money cannot satisfy it. You can gather as much money as you want, but how can it satisfy your basic urge? Society has diverted your urge, has given you a diversion; it has given you a toy.
And that’s how we start from the very beginning: the child is crying, he wants milk, and he is given a pacifier. And the poor child starts sucking the pacifier and thinks that it is the mother’s breast. How mean can we be? That is sheer meanness. We are being very political with the poor child, diplomatic, cunning. The poor child has no understanding yet to make a distinction between the pacifier and the breast; he is being deceived. It will be no wonder if later on that child disrespects his mother, one day hates his mother.
You can go to any psychoanalyst and ask him, “What is the fundamental problem with every person?” and you will be surprised to know that he will not give you some name: neurosis, psychosis, schizophrenia, hysteria, etcetera, etcetera. If you ask him, “What is the fundamental problem with every psychologically disturbed person?” he will say, “the mother.” But why the mother? – because she was the first one to start deceiving the child; she was the child’s first acquaintance with the world. Because a child needs warmth as much as milk; it is a very deep physiological need of the child. And when the child was crying and wanting to be hugged… And now he cannot trust anybody. If he cannot trust even his own mother, how can he trust anybody else?
It is a proven scientific fact now, that if a child is given nourishment but no bodily warmth, he will shrink and die. Or if he survives he will remain retarded, unhealthy for his whole life; something will be missing in him. He not only needs the mother’s milk, he needs the warmth of the mother’s bosom, the warmth of the mother’s body. That warmth is now understood to be absolutely fundamental, absolutely necessary.
But when the child is crying he cannot say, “Mum, I want to be hugged,” because he has no language yet. By crying he is saying, “Hug me, kiss me, caress me, let me come close to you.” And he is being given a teddy bear, or some toy to engage with. He is being deceived from the very beginning: he wants something, he gets something else. That’s how we go on distorting him.
When a child is coming to sexual maturity we start giving him ambitions. We start telling him, “Come first at university, come first at school – come first. Wherever you are, whatsoever you are doing, you have to be first.” We implant a great desire into his mind to be first anywhere he is; this gives a new direction to his sexual energy.
Society is trying to divert his natural energies. We start telling him, “Unless you have a big car, a big house, lots of money in the bank, you are a failure.” He begins running after big things. He may not need a big house. In fact his needs are not such that he needs a big house with many, many rooms; a smaller house may be far more beautiful because it can be kept cleaner. But the idea that has been implanted in his mind is: “Unless you have a very imposing big house you are a failure.” Now the big house, the money in the bank, become his symbols of fulfillment – but they are only symbols, empty. Deep down he is still hankering, deep down he is unfulfilled. His deep consciousness is continuously telling him, “Be natural, let your energies flow in a natural, spontaneous way.”
You ask me, “How long does this stupid sex continue to haunt one?” Why do you call it stupid? – you are angry at it. Sex is not stupid. You may be stupid; sex is simply sex. You can be stupid with it, you can be intelligent with it; that is something to do with you, not sex. And if you call it names, if you condemn, it will persist. You will be sixty, you will be seventy, you will be eighty – it won’t make any difference. In fact, the weaker your body becomes, the more the repressed sex will explode in your consciousness.

A big burly rapist broke into a Texas homestead. All the men were out on a cattle drive, and he raped all ten women living there – all except the eighty-five-year-old great grandma.
The victims lay around groaning in a state of confusion. The rapist lay in the corner, naked and exhausted.
Old Granny took her spectacles off her nose, put them on the nose of the rapist and cried, “Look around, big fella, see if you missed anybody!”

Sex will persist. Don’t call it stupid; you are being stupid with it. Accept it. It is a natural desire, a natural energy, the very fountain-source of all life. Yes, there are things beyond it, beautiful spaces beyond it. Sex brings joy, and sex brings misery too. They are both mixed with sex because sex is a mixture of the sky and the earth, the body and the soul. Hence it brings both: one moment it gives you wings, another moment it cuts them. One moment is a great ecstasy, another moment you have fallen into deep agony. One moment you are on a peak, a sunlit peak, another moment you are groaning in a dark valley. One has to learn about the valleys and the peaks; sex is both.
And one has to learn by one’s own experience, not by what others say, not by what I say. Your own experience of sex will make you free of it. And I am not saying simply be free of it; don’t try to be free of it, otherwise you never will be. What I am saying is: freedom from sex is a consequence, a by-product. You cannot achieve it directly, it comes indirectly. If you live sex with deep playfulness, meditativeness, as a gift of existence, seeing the peaks and the valleys again and again, slowly, slowly, a third point will arise in your being: the witness who witnesses the peak, who witnesses the valley – and neither peaks are important, nor valleys are important. Slowly, slowly, your consciousness has gone through a revolution; you have become more centered in the witnessing soul. That witnessing is brahmacharya, that witnessing brings real celibacy. It is not against sex, it is beyond sex.
Otherwise, sex will go on haunting you to your very last moment. You will be dying and you will not be thinking of God, you will be thinking of sex. That’s why the moment you die, you are immediately reborn – not a minute is lost because you die with the idea of sex in your head. You leave this body and because sex can only be fulfilled through the body, immediately the desire to enter another body arises.

Down in sunny Mexico there lived an old aunt with four very pretty nieces. One day Pancho Villa and his gang of revolutionary bandits broke into the house. Accosting the women on the patio the brigand said, “This place is in our possession and you are in our power.”
“We are helpless!” one of the girls exclaimed, “and we must submit, but please spare our poor old aunt.”
“Shut up!” snapped the aunt, “War is war!”

Freedom from sex has nothing to do with age, it has something to do with gaining a higher awareness, a deeper awareness. Become a witness, and don’t call sex stupid. Become intelligent, see, watch, observe. Whatsoever is given to you must have a reason, a rhyme in it; whatsoever you have got must have something of the beyond in it. You are only able to see the lower part of the ladder because your eyes are not open and your being is not conscious; hence you see only sex, the lower part of the ladder. The higher part of the ladder is samadhi. If you can see the whole ladder, all the rungs of it, you will be surprised – sex is the door to samadhi.
The very idea of samadhi was born because of those few rare people who were able to attain to total orgasmic joy through sex. They became aware that there is something in sex which is not sexual at all. In a deep orgasmic state time disappears, mind disappears, ego disappears. Now these three things have nothing to do with sex. And because they disappear, great joy arises. That arising of joy has nothing directly to do with sex either – it arose because sex helped, became a context for the disappearance of the ego, mind and time.
The first experimenters – it must have been thousands of years ago, their names are lost – the first tantrikas, the first people who attained to samadhi through sex, watched, meditated, and saw one thing – sex is only a physiological triggering of a certain process which can also be triggered without sex, which can be triggered just by meditation. There is no need to go into sex. Once they knew that the process could be triggered by other means – by Yoga methods, by Tao methods, by Tantra methods, by Sufi methods – once they knew that the same state of no ego, no mind, no time, could be attained without going into sex, they had found the key. But the key was found only through searching in sex.
Sex has been the very source of religion, and the sexual experience was the first experience of samadhi. Don’t call it stupid, please. Go into it lovingly, playfully, meditatively. Try to understand because liberation comes through understanding and in no other way.

The sixth question:
Osho,
Should one listen to and follow the wise advice of parents, teachers and well-wishers?
Listen, but don’t follow. Listen well, but follow your own insight. Don’t follow others’ advice. Listen, certainly, very meditatively, try to understand what they want to convey to you. They may really wish you well, but if you start blindly following you will never attain to your own intelligence. You will remain dependent, on crutches, you will always be looking up to others to tell you what to do, what not to do. You will always be needing leaders – and to need leaders is a very unhealthy state.
Listen, because people have great experience, and if they are sharing, willing to share, it would be foolish on your part not to listen. Sharing in their experience may give you great insight; help you become more aware – but don’t follow.
People follow literally and then they just become blind. When others are giving you all that you need, what is the need to have your own eyes? When others are chewing for you, what is the need to chew for yourself? Slowly, slowly, you become more and more weakened, more and more impoverished, more and more starved.

A man who had recently opened a shop had a large notice overhead which read: Fresh Fish Sold Here.
A friend came along and said, “Why have you got Here on the board?” So the shopkeeper took off the word Here.
Then another friend came along and said, “Sold? Of course it is sold. You are not giving it away, are you?” So off came the word Sold.
A third friend came along and said, “Fresh fish? It has to be fresh. Who would buy stale fish from you? Cut out the word Fresh.”
The shopkeeper obliged. Now only the word Fish remained on the board. A fourth man arrived and said, Fish? Fancy having that up. You can smell it a mile away.” The shopkeeper erased this last word from the board.
A fifth man arrived and said, “What’s the idea of hanging a blank board over the shop?” The shopkeeper removed the board.
Finally a sixth man came along and said, “You have opened such a big shop here. Why don’t you put a board up saying: Fresh Fish Sold Here?”

Now if you go on listening to people you will become more and more confused. Your confusion is that you have been listening to many kinds of people and they are all giving different advice; that’s how you have become confused. And I am not saying they are not wishing you well; they are well-wishers, but not very conscious well-wishers, otherwise they would not give you advice. They would give you insights, not advice. They would not tell you what to do and what not to do. They would help you to become more aware, so that you can see for yourself what has to be done and what has not to be done.
The real friend is one who does not advise you, but helps you to become more alert, more aware, more conscious of life – its problems, its challenges, its mysteries; helps you to go on your own voyage, gives you the courage to experiment, gives you the courage to seek and search, gives you the courage to commit many mistakes – because one who is not ready to commit mistakes will never learn anything at all.
Commit as many mistakes as you can, but don’t commit the same mistake twice because that makes you stupid. Commit new mistakes, invent new mistakes, and you will be learning all the time and your intelligence will be growing all the time. Your intelligence needs sharpening.
Real friends help you sharpen your intelligence. They don’t give you fixed advice because fixed advice is of no use. What is true today may not be true tomorrow, and what is right in one situation may be wrong in another. Situations are changing all the time, so what you need is not a fixed pattern of living, but a way of seeing, so wherever you are, in whatsoever situation you find yourself, you know how to behave spontaneously, how to depend on your own being.

The seventh question:
Osho,
I simply can't believe in God. What should I do?
Krishna Kant, I have not been telling you to believe in God. Why should you be worried about it? If you can’t believe, you can’t believe – forget all about it. Now it is God’s problem that Krishna Kant does not believe in him; if he is anxious, worried, he will take care of it. But why are you worried? Deep down somewhere you must want to believe, otherwise why the question at all? I am not telling you to believe in God; there is no need.
Buddha attained to the ultimate without believing in God, why can’t you? Mahavira attained to truth, to enlightenment, without believing in any God, why can’t you?
In that sense, the Eastern religions are far richer than the Western religions. Judaism, Christianity, Islam, the three religions that were born outside of India, are a little poor, unsophisticated, crude in that way. Hinduism, Buddhism, Jainism, the three religions that were born in India, have a tremendous sophistication about them; they don’t make such unnecessary demands on you.
Buddhism is the ultimate in sophistication. Buddha says there is no need to believe in God, there is no need to even believe in the soul; there is no need to believe at all. Belief is not a necessity for being religious. Then what is necessary? – meditation is necessary, not belief. And one can meditate without belief because meditation is a scientific method.
It has happened many times that an atheist has come to me and asked, “Can I meditate?” The idea has become prevalent that you cannot meditate unless you believe in God. Now that is a very foolish notion, meditation has nothing to do with God. In fact the truth is, if you believe in God it will be difficult to meditate; your very belief will become a disturbance.
The person who does not believe in anything can simply move beyond thinking; the person who believes clings to thinking because his belief is a thought. Belief is part of the mind. If you believe too much in God you cannot leave the mind because leaving the mind will obviously mean leaving your belief. The man who cannot believe is in a better situation.
You should be happy that you cannot believe in God. So far, so good. Now meditate.
And remember, the English word meditate gives the wrong connotation. In English there is really no word which can translate the word dhyana. From dhyana the word ch’an arose in China, and then ch’an moved to Japan and became zen, but the root is dhyana.
When we use the word meditation it gives a feeling that you are meditating upon something – on what? To meditate means you have to have some object, and that is the problem. Dhyana simply means that it is not a question of focusing, concentrating on something; rather, it is dropping all the content of the mind and just being. Meditation in the sense of dhyana needs no object; it is an objectless, contentless state of consciousness. You go on dropping, neti neti – neither this nor that, you go on rejecting all thoughts, good and bad. When all thoughts are eliminated what is left? – you, and that is God.
But what you call it does not matter. You can call it God if the word appeals to you; if it doesn’t appeal to you, you can call it nirvana, you can call it Tao, or whatever. But don’t be worried that you can’t believe in God; that is good – this is my approach. If somebody says “I believe in God,” I say “That is good. Now let us start from there, that will do.” If somebody says “I don’t believe in God,” I say “That is good. Now let us start from there.”
You have to start from the point where you are. And all points are good because all points are on the circumference and from every point on the circumference the center is available. So move toward the center, don’t be worried about where you are.

One afternoon Mulla Nasruddin was getting a haircut in a barber’s shop. He noticed a pricelist on the wall of the shop and on the list was, “Singe – five rupees.” He asked the barber why it cost so much.
“Every hair on your head,” said the barber, “is a little hollow tube, open at the ends, so the body’s energy sort of bleeds out of it. After you have had a haircut it is a good idea to get a singe because it closes up the hole at the end of each hair and seals in the energy. Otherwise your hair, and your whole body, just keeps getting weaker and weaker every time you have it cut.”
“Now, wait a minute,” said the Mulla, “what about the hair on my chin? I shave it every day, and cut off the ends, and it just keeps getting thicker and stronger. How do you explain that?
“Easy!” said the barber. “You just ain’t the kind of a fella this story was made up for!”

These are all just stories. If it appeals, good; if it doesn’t appeal, very good.
Forget about God. There is no need to believe; you do not need to do anything about it. Don’t waste your time on God. Just because of this word so many people are wasting their time. Somebody is trying to prove, somebody is trying to disprove, great treatises are being written – more books are written about God than anything else, millions of books, the libraries are full. Don’t waste your time. If you can’t believe, then that story is not for you. But we have other stories, so why be worried? For Godless people too there is a way.
My way is for all. Whosoever comes is accepted. The Hindu, the Mohammedan, the Christian, the Jaina, the Sikh, the Buddhist, the Parsi – whosoever comes is accepted. I love all kinds of stories.
Any kind of beginning is good, but begin. Don’t remain stuck where you are, move toward the center. Meditate, and that will bring you home. And then you can call it whatsoever you like; it is none of my business what you call it. You can give it any name you fancy.

The last question:
Osho,
Should children be told all the facts of life, irrespective of their age?
What to tell children, and what not to tell them, has always been a problem down the ages; parents have been very concerned. In the past, the strategy was not to tell them the facts of life, to avoid the subject as far as possible because people were very afraid of the facts of life.
The very phrase “facts of life” is a euphemism; it hides a simple thing. To avoid saying anything about sex, to not even use the word sex, they have made this metaphor, “facts of life.” What facts of life? – it is just to not say anything about sex.
The whole past of humanity has lived with this deception, but the children discover it sooner or later. In fact they discover it sooner rather than later, and they discover it in a very wrong way. Because the right person is not ready to tell them, they have to work it out on their own. They collect, they become peeping toms – and you are responsible for reducing them to peeping toms. They collect from all the wrong sources, from ugly people. They will carry those wrong notions with them their whole lives, and you are the cause of it. Their whole sex life may be affected by the wrong information they have gathered.
Now there is as much wrong information prevalent in the world about sex as is possible. Even in the twentieth century people are living with immense ignorance about sex; even people who you think should know better. Even your doctor does not really know what sex is, does not know its complexity. He should know, but even doctors live very superstitiously; they too learn things from the marketplace. In no medical college is sex taught as a separate subject – such an immense, powerful subject and yet nothing is taught about it. Yes, the physiology of sex is known by the physician, but the physiology is not all; there are deeper layers: there is psychology, there is spirituality. There is a psychology to sex and there is a spirituality to sex; the physiology is only the surface. Much research has been done, and in this century we know more than ever before, but the knowledge is not widespread.
People are afraid because their parents were afraid, and that fear has become infectious. You are afraid of sex and you don’t want to tell your children about it. But you have to tell your children about it, you owe it to them. You have to be truthful. Don’t shirk from the truth and don’t lie – in the long run, truth always pays.

“Mom, do we get our food from God?”
“Yes, we do, Barbara.”
“And at Christmas time does Santa bring all our presents?”
“That’s right.”
“And on my birthday the good fairy brings presents?”
“Hmm, yes.”
“And did the stork bring little brother?”
“True.”
“Then what the heck does Pop hang around here for?”

It is better to be truthful. But I am not saying to jump on your children and start being truthful whether they want it or not. Now that – the other extreme – is happening particularly in the West because the psychologists are saying that the truth has to be told. People go on telling the truth whether the children are inquiring about it or not. That too is wrong. Wait! If the child inquires, be truthful; if he does not inquire then there is no need, he is not interested yet.

At the dinner table the father almost choked when his little eight-year-old boy asked, “Daddy, where do I come from?”
Reddening, he said, “Well, I guess the time has come for you and me to have a man-to-man talk. After dinner I will tell you about the birds and the bees.”
The kid said, “What birds and bees? Little Frankie down the block told me he came from Chicago. All I want to know is where I come from!”

So wait a little. They will ask themselves, don’t be in such a hurry. And remember, whatsoever is the case, be truthful, however hard it seems. It will be hard because you were not told the truth by your parents. For centuries the truth has not been told; nobody ever tells it to their children, everybody gathers it from rumors. People feel embarrassed, afraid that the children may discover the truth. Drop all those fears, and don’t try to deceive the children in any way – it can be dangerous.

Six-year-old Luigino comes home from school where he has learned three new words, without knowing their meaning, so he asks his mother, “Mom, what do prick, pussy and balls mean?”
The mother, extremely embarrassed, answers, “Well, dear, prick means cheese, pussy means chair, and balls mean boots.”
After a few days the grandmother, a pious, prudish, country lady, visits her daughter and grandson She rings the bell and Luigino opens the door. The old woman hugs the child and Luigino, proud of his new vocabulary, says, “Granny, you must be tired. Sit down on this pussy.”
The woman almost faints, but Luigino goes on without hesitating. “And if you are hungry eat this piece of prick.”
Shocked and horrified the grandmother finally asks, “Luigino, where is your mum?”
“Ah, she is in the next room polishing Daddy’s balls!”

Enough for today.

============================================================

The first question:
Osho,
What is fear made of? It is always there, round a corner, but when I turn to face it, it is only a shadow. If it is nonsubstantial, how does it manage to have such power over me?
Fear is as nonsubstantial as your shadow, but it is. The shadow also exists, nonsubstantial, negative, but not nonexistential. Sometimes the shadow can have a great impact on you. In a jungle when night is approaching you can be frightened of your own shadow; in a lonely place, on a lonely path, you can start running because of your own shadow. Your running will be real, your escaping will be real, but the cause will be nonsubstantial.
You can run away from a rope thinking it is a snake; if you come back and look closely, observe, you will laugh at the stupidity of it. You are afraid to go to places where fear exists. You are more afraid of fear than of anything else because the very existence of fear shakes your foundations. And this shaking of your foundations is very real, remember.
Fear is like a dream, a nightmare, and when you awake from a nightmare the aftereffects persist, the hangover persists: your breathing has changed, you are perspiring, your body is trembling, you are hot. You know that it was just a nightmare, a dream, nonsubstantial; but this knowing will take time to penetrate to the very core of your being. Meanwhile, the effects of the nonsubstantial dream will continue. Fear is a nightmare.
You ask me, “What is fear made of?” Fear is made of ignorance of one’s own self. There is only one fear – it manifests in many ways, there can be a thousand and one manifestations, but basically fear is one thing – and that is: “Deep inside, I may not be.” And in a way it is true that you are not.
God is, you are not. The guest is, the host is not. And because you are suspicious – and your suspicion is very valid – you don’t look in. You go on pretending that you are. You know that if you look in, you are not. This is a deep, tacit understanding. It is not intellectual, it is existential. It is in your very guts, the feeling that “I may not be.” It is better not to look in; to go on looking out. At least it keeps you befooled, it keeps intact the illusion that “I am.” But because this feeling of “I amness” is false, it creates fear; anything can destroy it, any deep encounter can shatter it. It can be shattered by love, it can be shattered by meeting a master, it can be shattered by a great disease, it can be shattered by seeing someone die. It can be shattered in many ways, it is very fragile. You are somehow managing it by not looking in.

Mulla Nasruddin was traveling on a train. The ticket collector came and asked for his ticket. Mulla Nasruddin looked in all his pockets, in all his suitcases, and couldn’t find the ticket. He was perspiring and becoming more and more frightened.
The ticket collector said, “Sir, you haven’t looked in one of your pockets. Why don’t you look in it?”
Mulla Nasruddin said, “Please don’t ask about that pocket. I am not going to look in it. That is my only hope! If I look in that pocket and it is not there, then it is not there, absolutely not. I cannot look in that pocket. Mind you, I will look everywhere else. That pocket is for my safety, I can still hope that it may be in that pocket. I have left it deliberately and I am not going to touch it. Whether I find the ticket or not, I am not going to look in that particular pocket.”

This is the situation with the ego too. You don’t look in, that is your only hope: “Who knows? Maybe it is.” But your tacit feeling says that if you look, it is not. This false ego which you have created by not looking in, by continuously looking out, is the root cause of fear.
You will be afraid of all those spaces in which you have to look. You will be afraid of beauty because beauty simply throws you in. A beautiful sunset, all those luminous colors in the clouds, and you will be afraid to look at it because such great beauty is bound to throw you in. Such great beauty stops thinking: for a moment the mind is in such awe it forgets how to think, how to go on spinning and weaving. The inner talk comes to a stop, a halt, and suddenly you are in.
People are afraid of great music, people are afraid of great poetry, people are afraid of deep intimacy. People’s love affairs are just hit-and-run affairs. They don’t go deep into each other’s being because the fear is there that the other’s pool of being will reflect them. Because, going deep into each other’s being, if they are not found in that pool, in that other being’s mirror, if the mirror remains empty, reflects nothing, then what?
People are afraid of love. They only pretend, they are only playing games in the name of love. They are afraid of meditation. Even in the name of meditation they are engaging in, at the most, new ways of thinking. That’s what Maharishi Mahesh Yogi’s Transcendental Meditation is – it is neither meditation nor transcendental. It is simply chanting a mantra, and chanting a mantra is nothing but a process of thought, concentrated thought. It is again a new device, a device to not meditate. People are repeating Christian prayers, Mohammedan prayers, Hindu prayers – all ways to avoid meditation. Remember, these are not meditations; the mind is so cunning that in the name of meditation it has created many pseudo-phenomena.
Meditation is when you are not doing anything at all, when the mind is not functioning at all. That nonfunctioning of the mind is meditation – no chanting, no mantra, no image, no concentration. One simply is. In that isness the ego disappears, and with the ego the shadow of the ego disappears. That shadow is fear.
Fear is one of the most important problems. Every human being has to go through it and come to a certain understanding about it. The ego gives you the fear that one day you may die. You go on deceiving yourself that death happens only to others, and in a way you are right: some neighbor dies, some acquaintance dies, some friend dies, your wife dies, your mother dies – it always happens to somebody else, never to you. You can hide behind this fact: maybe you are an exception, maybe you are not going to die. The ego is trying to protect you. But each time somebody dies, something in you becomes shaky. Each death is a small death for you. Never send somebody to ask for whom the bell tolls; it tolls for thee. Each death is your death. Even when a dry leaf falls from the tree, it is your death.
Hence, we go on protecting ourselves. Somebody is dying and we talk about the immortality of the soul. The leaf is falling from the tree and we say “Nothing to be worried about. Soon the spring will come and the tree will have foliage again. This is only a change, only the garments are being changed.”
People believe in the immortality of the soul not because they know but because they are afraid. The more cowardly a person is, the more possible it is that he will believe in the immortality of the soul – not that he is religious, he is simply cowardly. Belief in the immortality of the soul has nothing to do with religion. The religious person knows “I am not,” and that whatsoever is left is immortal – but that has nothing to do with “me.” This “me” is not immortal, this “I” is not immortal. This “I” is very temporary – it is manufactured by us.
Fear is the shadow of “I,” and because somewhere deep down the “I” is always alert: “I will have to disappear in death,” the basic fear is of death. All other fears only reflect this basic one. And the beauty of it is that death is as nonexistential as the ego, and between these two nonexistentials – the ego and death – the bridge is fear.
Fear is very impotent, it has no power. You say, “If it is nonsubstantial, then how does it manage to have such power over me?” You want to believe in it – that’s its power. You are not ready to take a plunge into your inner depth and face your inner emptiness – that is its power. Otherwise it is impotent, utterly impotent. Nothing is ever born out of fear. Love gives birth, love is creative; fear is impotent…

Mr. and Mrs. Smith were brought before the bar of justice.
“I would like to divorce this character,” shouted the wife.
“I would like to get rid of this battle ax,” screamed the husband.
The judge asked, “How many children do you have?”
“Three,” said the wife.
“Why don’t you stay married one more year,” said the judge, “have another child, and then you will have four. Then you can take two each and both be satisfied.”
“Yeah,” said the husband, “but supposing we have twins?”
“Ha!” said the wife, “Look at my little twin-maker. If I depended on him, I wouldn’t have had these three!”

Fear is utterly impotent. It has never created anything. It cannot create; it is not. But it can destroy your whole life, it can surround you like a dark, dark cloud, it can exploit all your energies. It will not allow you to move into any deep experience of beauty, poetry, love, joy, celebration, meditation. No, it will keep you just on the surface because it can exist only on the surface. It is a ripple on the surface.
Go in, look in, and if it is empty, so what? Then that’s our nature, then that’s what we are. Why should one be worried about emptiness? Emptiness is as beautiful as the sky. Your inner being is nothing but the inner sky. The sky is empty, but it is the empty sky that holds all, the whole of existence, the sun, the moon, the stars, the earth, the planets. It is the empty sky that gives space to all that is. It is the empty sky that is the background of all that exists. Things come and go and the sky remains the same.
In exactly the same way, you have an inner sky; it is also empty. Clouds come and go, planets are born and disappear, stars arise and die; and the inner sky remains the same, untouched, untarnished, unscarred. We call that inner sky sakshin, the witness – and that is the whole goal of meditation.
Go in, enjoy the inner sky. Remember, whatsoever you can see, you are not it. If you can see thoughts, then you are not those thoughts; if you can see your feelings, then you are not your feelings; if you can see your dreams, desires, memories, imaginations, projections, then you are not them. Go on eliminating all that you can see. Then one day a tremendous moment arrives, the most significant moment of one’s life, when there is nothing left to be rejected. All the seen has disappeared and only the seer is there. That seer is the empty sky.
To know it is to be fearless, and to know it is to be full of love. To know it is to be godliness, to be immortal.

The second question:
Osho,
What is love?
Tallis, love is the radiance, the fragrance of knowing oneself, of being oneself.
Tallis is very young, he is only nine, but he is far ahead for his age. His mental age must be almost double that, nearabout eighteen, hence the question.
Love is overflowing joy. Love is when you have seen who you are; then there is nothing left except to share your being with others. Love is when you have seen that you are not separate from existence. Love is when you have felt an organic, orgasmic unity with all that is.
Love is not a relationship, Tallis. Love is a state of being; it has nothing to do with anybody else. One is not in love, one is love. And of course when one is love, one is in love – but that is an outcome, a by-product, that is not the source. The source is that one is love.
And who can be love? Certainly, if you are not aware of who you are, you cannot be love. You will be fear. Fear is just the opposite of love. Remember, hate is not the opposite of love, as people think; hate is love standing upside down, it is not the opposite of love. The real opposite of love is fear. In love one expands, in fear one shrinks. In fear one becomes closed, in love one opens. In fear one doubts, in love one trusts. In fear one is left lonely, in love one disappears – hence there is no question of loneliness at all. When one is not, how can one be lonely? Then these trees and the birds and the clouds and the sun and the stars are all within you. Love is when you have known your inner sky.
And Tallis, this is the right moment, the right age, to enter the world of love. This is the time when parents, society, the state and the church are poisoning children and making them afraid. This is the time when fear is created by the exploiters. This is the time when society reduces small children to slaves; and one can be reduced to a slave only if great fear is created.
But if the society is sane, and not dominated by stupid politicians and priests, if the society is not pathological, then this is also the time when it will help the children to become more and more loving, will help the children to know more about beauty, about music, about poetry, about dance, about meditation. This is the time when a child can simply take a plunge without any difficulties. Later on it will become more and more difficult because as the children get older, their fears also grow older and stronger. As they get older their egos becomes stronger. As they get older their capacity to learn decreases. As they get older they become more and more cowardly, afraid of the unknown.
Young children are free of fear; they are born without any fear. If society can help and support them to remain without fear, can help them to climb the trees and the mountains, swim the oceans and the rivers; if the society can help them in every possible way to become adventurers, adventurers of the unknown; and if society can create a great curiosity in them instead of giving them dead beliefs, then the children will turn into great lovers, lovers of life – and that is true religion. There is no higher religion than love.
Tallis, meditate, dance, sing, and go deeper and deeper into yourself. Listen to the birds more attentively; look at the flowers with awe, wonder. Don’t become knowledgeable, don’t go labeling things. That’s what knowledgeability is: the great art of labeling everything, categorizing everything. From this age, start playing guitar or learning to play the flute. Meet people, mix with people, as many people as possible because each person expresses a different facet of God. Learn from people. Don’t be afraid, this existence is not your enemy, this existence mothers you, this existence is ready to support you in every possible way.
Trust, and you will start feeling a new upsurge of energy in you; that energy is love, that energy wants to bless the whole of existence, because in that energy one feels blessed. And when you feel blessed what else can you do except bless the whole of existence? Love is a deep desire to bless the whole of existence.

The third question:
Osho,
Why are so many people attracted toward you from all parts of the world?
I don’t know. I also am surprised; it should not be so. The government is against me, society is against me, all the religions are against me, and still people keep on coming. All kinds of barriers are created, but still people keep on coming.
Something mysterious is happening, something which cannot be explained. Something elusive is transpiring. That’s why those who come as observers or spectators or journalists cannot catch hold of it. So they collect rumors from people in the town who never come here, and they carry on reporting. All over the world almost, in nearly all the languages, there are rumors on rumors. This is very strange. Those people have not experienced what is happening here, they have not been participants, and yet they think they have understood.
There are things which can be understood only when you participate. You cannot know what love is if you see two lovers hugging each other. If you watch from the outside, scientifically, you will know that two persons are hugging. But where is love? What is love? The meeting of the bones and the meeting of the flesh is not love. Two people kissing – you cannot explain it through chemistry, that would destroy the whole truth of it; chemistry cannot explain it.
The people that come here, unless they are participants, deep down they are still outside. And when they are just coming as participants in order to report, then they are not participants at all; they are taking notes, invisible notes about what they are going to report. They are not drunk with the wine that is available here.
This is a place for drunkards. This is a place for people who are crazy for God, for godliness. This is a place of love. You can see people dancing and you will shrug your shoulders: “So what? How can dance be meditation?” – because you see only the gestures, you don’t see the dancer disappearing within. And you cannot see. When the dancer disappears and only the dance remains, it is meditation; if the dancer is there, it is only dance, not meditation. When the singer disappears and only the song remains, it is meditation. When the musician is not found and only music remains, then it is meditation. But how are you going to find out from the outside? It is impossible – you will have to become a participant. The only way to know what wine can do to you is to drink it.

Many years ago, in a rural district, a farmer was helping at his wife’s delivery by holding up a kerosene lamp. When the doctor had produced not one, but three fine babies, the farmer ran away.
“Come back with that lamp,” said the doctor. “I think there is another one.”
“I will not!” answered the farmer. “I think it is the light that is attracting them.”

So I don’t know what is happening. Maybe it is because of the light that people keep on coming from every corner of the world. And the lamp that I am holding is not such that I can hide it; I cannot even escape. It cannot be put out – it is something that is beyond me, it is something that surpasses me. I am as much surprised by it as you are, I am as much intrigued by it as you are; so I cannot give you an exact answer as to why people are attracted. You will have to feel it for yourself.
You also have come here. Now get deeper, deeper into me and into the space that is being created here. That is the only way to know; there is no other.

The fourth question:
Osho,
Thank you. I still don't know what to drop, but thank you.
Kabir, this is beautiful; this is how it should be. In fact there is nothing to drop. Just the understanding that the ego is not something to be dropped, just the seeing that it is not, is the dropping. The seeing is the dropping; the understanding is the liberation.
Jesus says, “Truth liberates,” but I would like to tell you, truth liberates only when it is your own. Jesus’ truth cannot liberate you, my truth cannot liberate you – only your own truth can. Liberation cannot come from the outside, liberation has to arise within you.
And this is good, Kabir, that you say, “I still don’t know what to drop, but thank you,” because you have started seeing. And the moment you start seeing you will find there is not anything to drop. The deeper you go into the ego the more nonsubstantial you will find it. And once you have looked through and through, you will simply laugh at the whole thing; it is so ridiculous because the ego is not there. And for so long it has tortured you, and for so many lives it has been a hell for you, so many miseries it has created for you. The harm has been incalculable – by something which, in the first place, is not.
The ego is a misunderstanding: so when you understand, the misunderstanding disappears. It is as if you have been calculating and you have put two plus two is five, and the whole calculation goes wrong. Then suddenly you look, you find the error, you see where you went wrong – two plus two is not five, two plus two is four.
You need not drop anything, there is nothing to drop. Simply seeing the error, the error disappears. Ego is a misunderstanding.

Two young lovers were strolling along a garden path. The boy felt exceptionally romantic. “Some moon in the sky, eh, honey?” he remarked.
“Yes, dear,” she agreed, “some moon in the sky.”
He steered her toward a part of the path where roses were blooming. “Some roses out there, eh, honey?” he nudged.
“Yes, dear,” she admitted, “some roses out there.”
By this time the dew was already shining on the grass and in his exuberance, the boy could not help remark, “Some dew on the grass, eh, honey?”
“Yeah, some do on the grass,” she snapped. “But I don’t, so be on your way.”

The ego is a very simple misunderstanding, just a fault in calculation, just a linguistic fallacy – just as your name is only part of the utilitarian world. A name has to be given – it would be difficult to manage in ordinary life without a name – but you know perfectly well that a name is not reality. Still, if somebody insults you by insulting your name you will be offended, although when you came into the world you had no name. Your parents called you Rama so you became Rama; they called you Chris, you became Chris. They could have called you something else, but if somebody now says something against Rama or Chris you are offended, you go mad. You are ready to kill or be killed – for a name which is only a utility, not a reality.
This is the case with the “I”; it also is a utility. You have to call yourself something, otherwise things would become very difficult. If you all started using the third person, if you all started calling yourselves “he” or “she,” it would become very difficult; things would become more complicated, it wouldn’t help anybody. Even when people become enlightened they go on using the word I, but now it is only a word; they are using their names still, but they are only labels. That has to be understood.
You cannot insult Buddha by insulting his name because he knows he is not it. You cannot insult Buddha by insulting his personality because he knows he is not that either. In fact you cannot insult him because he knows he is always the witness, and the witness cannot be insulted. That is the miracle: when you are insulting him, the witness is witnessing the insult. You cannot insult the witness. Buddha will always be the witness, you cannot reduce him to anything else. The witness always escapes any traps you lay, it is never found in those traps, it simply disappears; it is always standing outside. You cannot put it in prison, it is always standing outside.
Kabir, there is nothing to drop. One just has to see it, see that there is nothing to drop. And there is nothing to gain either. All is as it should be. And I am happy that that understanding is arising in you – hence your thankfulness.

The fifth question:
Osho,
Why can't I understand you?
There is no need to understand me at all. What is needed is to understand yourself.
How is it going to help you if you understand me? And what will you understand by understanding me? You will understand what I say, you will collect it, you will become more knowledgeable – and that is not going to help. In fact it can even be a great hindrance. All knowledge becomes a hindrance to wisdom.
I am not here to make you understand me, I am here to help you to understand yourself. You have to watch your own actions more closely, your relationships, your moods; how you are when you are alone, how you are when you are with people, how you behave, how you react; whether your reactions are past-oriented, fixed patterns of thought, or spontaneous, responsible. Watch all these things, go on watching your own mind, heart. That’s what has to be understood, that is the book to be opened; you are the unopened book.
And millions of people die as unopened books, their pages uncut. Please don’t die as an unopened book. Read – go deep into your being. You are carrying all the Vedas and all the Bibles and all the Korans in you. You are carrying all that has happened to humanity or can ever happen to humanity. You represent in a tiny drop, in a dewdrop, all the oceans, past, present and future. In your small flowering will be represented all the flowers.
Do not to be worried about what I say. How can you understand it in the first place? I speak from my heights using the same language that you use because there is no other language, but I give those words different meanings, twists and turns. When you listen to those words you listen according to your own mind, according to your own conditioning. How can you understand me?
You can love me, but you cannot understand me. But if you love me, a great understanding will arise. And that will not arise through understanding my words, but by understanding your own being. The deeper your understanding is about yourself, the deeper will be your penetration into my words.
You are here, but you may not find it easy to understand me. There are different kinds of people; a Buddha is one type, Jesus is a totally different type. A man who can easily understand Jesus may not be able to understand Buddha easily, may find it almost impossible. That is one of the reasons I am speaking on so many enlightened masters – so that I can use different languages, so that I can become helpful to different types of people. One who can understand Tilopa may not be able to understand Kabir, and one who can understand Kabir may not be able to understand Saraha. I speak on different masters; different masters are just different excuses to approach different types of people. And all types of people have gathered around me.
This is happening for the first time, remember; this has not happened before. This is utterly unique. Thousands gathered around Buddha, but they were of a single type, the type for which Buddha had appeal. Thousands gathered around Mahavira, the type for which Mahavira had appeal. And Mahavira and Buddha were contemporaries: the people who had gathered with Mahavira remained with Mahavira, and the people who had gathered with Buddha remained with Buddha – they could never understand each other’s master. The followers of Mahavira could not understand what Buddha was talking about, it all looked like nonsense to them: There is no self? – what more nonsensical statement could there be?
Self, the Supreme Self, is at the center of Mahavira’s thinking. And when Mahavira uses the words Supreme Self, with a capital S, he means exactly the same thing as when Buddha uses the words no-self. The Supreme Self is not the ego; in the Supreme Self there is no idea of “I.” That’s why Buddha calls it no-self: when there is no “I” why call it self? The Supreme Self would make the “I” look even bigger.
These are different people; their language is different, although they are expressing the same truth. Around Jesus there was a certain kind of people, but only one type. With me it is a totally different phenomenon. Here there are Christians, and Mohammedans, and Buddhists, and Jainas, and Hindus, and Parsis, and Sikhs, and Jews, and all kinds of people. This is a world gathering.
Buddha lived in a small place, just in a small province, Bihar. The province was so named because of Buddha. Bihar means “wandering of the enlightened one,” the place of his wanderings. He wandered in a small place. Jesus was never heard of beyond his small country. His country was of almost no importance. It became important only because of him, and only later on. Otherwise it was just an unimportant country, a desert.
I have heard…

Two Jews were talking, and one said, “Our whole misery, this whole hell that we have suffered down the ages, can be put on the shoulders of Moses. He was responsible.”
The other said, “I don’t understand. Why? Why was Moses responsible for all our misery? He did all he could to help us.”
But the other was adamant. He said, “No! While leading us out of Egypt, if he had gone left rather than right, all the oil would have been ours. But he led us into the desert!”

Jesus was born in a very, very unimportant country. His name was not heard of beyond the small province where he lived. While he was alive not much was known about him, only a few Jews gathered around him. It was a similar case with Mohammed.
With me it is a totally different phenomenon. Almost all kinds of people have arrived here. This is a world gathering, for the first time this is a universal brotherhood. Hence I am speaking on all the enlightened masters. They are just excuses so that I can be available to all kinds and all types of people.
If you cannot understand me right now while I am speaking on Kabir, wait – soon I will be speaking on Buddha, maybe then you will find something closer to your heart. And then I will be speaking on somebody else: maybe it is Zen that rings bells in your heart, or Sufism, or Hasidism – I am going to speak on all the possible ways. If you can wait, sooner or later you will find something that fits you.
You cannot change your type, that is unchangeable. Your type changes only when you go beyond it – then you disappear. Then a pure consciousness remains; neither introvert nor extrovert, neither male nor female, neither of the head nor of the heart.

The bus was crowded and a lanky mountaineer was sitting next to a pretty girl, whose short skirt kept creeping up over her knees. She fought a constant, though losing, battle with it. She kept pulling her skirt down, but as soon as she let go, it began to slide up again. In desperation she gave it one hard yank, then looked up to meet the eyes of her traveling companion.
“Don’t rip your calico, sister,” he advised her. “My weakness is liquor.”

There are different types; people have different characteristics.
If these talks are not reaching your heart, if you are feeling a little at a loss, don’t be worried. Try to make the best of it, and be silently patient. I go on speaking every day; one never knows when it is the right moment for a certain person. It is a question of type, and also of mood. In a certain positive mood you simply understand with no effort; in a negative mood you can make a great effort and still fail. On a certain morning you are feeling in such harmony, such deep well-being, that your eyes are clear; the mind is not noisy, you are in a state of melody – and then something suddenly strikes home, goes in like an arrow and penetrates your being. One never knows when that moment will come. So I go on talking to you every morning, I go on shooting arrows in the dark. Somebody is bound to be hit. I know you are there; your time, your moment, will come. Be a little more patient.

The sixth question:
Osho,
For years I have been listening to you to find out the right way to God. But the more I listen, the more confused I become. What is wrong with me?
Satya Prakash, there is no right way to God. There are ways and ways, but there is no right way to God. There are ways, but don’t seek the way. The search for the way creates fanatics. All ways are his, so don’t be too worried about the right way.
And how can you decide what is right? You don’t know anything about what is right and what is wrong. If you already knew what was right, there would be no need to search. You must be carrying a certain idea in your head. You must be carrying an a priori criterion, a conclusion given to you by others, and you must be judging according to that criterion. That’s why you go on missing me. And rather than clarity happening to you, you are becoming more and more confused.
My observation is that people who come already with a conclusion always become confused when they listen to me, because there is a constant struggle between what I am saying and their conclusion. Between these two they are crushed. People who come here without any conclusion immediately start attaining to clarity.
So that is what is wrong with you: you must be carrying a hidden conclusion – Hindu, Christian, Buddhist, Jaina. In a way you have already arrived, deep down in your heart you think you know. Now the only question is to find somebody who can support your conclusion.
You are not in search of a master, you are in search of somebody who can strengthen your ego, who can strengthen your knowledge; who can supply you with more information supporting what you already believe. But I don’t support any knowledge; I destroy all kinds of knowledge. I go on pulling away all that you know, brick by brick, slowly, slowly, until one day you find the earth beneath your feet has disappeared – hence the confusion. Listening to me, you have become attached to me as well, and you are not yet detached from your old conclusions. Hence, you are pulled in two directions, opposite directions, and because of that you are in confusion.
Either you have to drop listening to me or you have to drop your conclusions. If you drop listening to me you will have a kind of certainty; not clarity but certainty, a kind of certainty – the stupid kind. Because you don’t know much, you can think that you know enough. A little knowledge is dangerous because it can give you the feeling that you have arrived.
An intelligent person knows that one is always arriving but never arrives, that life remains a pilgrimage, an eternal pilgrimage. One is approaching closer and closer to godliness every day, but this is an eternal process. One cannot say one day, “I have arrived.” When someone says “I have arrived,” he is simply saying that all his resources are finished, that he is no longer interested in the pilgrimage, that he is no longer interested in the journey, that he is tired, that he is weary, that he wants to settle down.
The real seeker goes on and on. And the joy of the journey is infinite, so who bothers to arrive? The stupidest person is one who has not taken even a single step along the way and still has the idea that he knows what is right and what is wrong.
If you drop listening to me you will have a kind of certainty: the certainty that ignorance gives, the certainty that false knowledge, borrowed knowledge gives; the certainty that will make you more and more stupid, more and more unintelligent.
Or you can drop your conclusions and come along with me. All the certainty that you have will disappear. I cannot promise you any certainty. I can promise you only infinite uncertainty – but clarity will arise, your mind will be unclouded. And in that clarity is truth, in that clarity you are able to see what life is. You may not be able to come to any conclusion because life is vast and cannot be reduced to any conclusion – but you will be able to enjoy the bliss of existence. You may not be able to make a theory out of it, a system of thought out of it, but great poetry will arise in you, and great dance and great love and great compassion. Your life will become a rejoicing. I don’t promise you any philosophy of life, I only promise a new way, a new style of life.
You say, “For years I have been listening to you to find out the right way to God.” You seem to have arrived at right and wrong about almost everything, even about God. How do you know that God is? What certainty have you got about God? You have already decided that God is – and now you are searching for the way?
God is not a hypothesis. You cannot start with God, you can only start with an open heart, an inquiry into what is. You cannot call it God, you can simply call it an inquiry into whatsoever is: “I don’t know what it is, God or no God, but I want to inquire.” Then you don’t seek a way to God, then you seek a totally different thing. You seek methods of inquiry, not ways to God. And I can teach you methods of inquiry.
Meditation, all the types of meditation, are methods of inquiry, not ways to God. Yes, if you go on inquiring, one day God is revealed, but that is not for you to decide in the beginning. It happens one day when your heart is really clear, with no clouds in your inner sky. What is revealed is called God by a few people, no-God by a few others; truth by a few, beauty by a few others; paradise by a few, nirvana by a few others. And there have been many who have not called it anything at all, they have remained completely silent about it.
One of the greatest philosophers of this age, Ludwig Wittgenstein, says in one of his most important aphorisms, “That which cannot be said, should not be said.” Down the ages, many have followed this dictum. Buddha has not said anything for or against God. He must have been asked thousands of times, but he would never say anything about it.
Whenever I come across somebody asking Buddha about God in the Buddhist scriptures I always remember a small anecdote…

A husband came home very late at night. It was three o’clock in the morning, the night was almost gone. He entered his wife’s room, and was very shocked because his wife was in bed with a stranger. He was so shocked that for a moment he could not say anything. Before he could find the right words his wife asked, “Where have you been? Why are you so late?”
He said, “First, tell me who the man in the bed is.”
And his wife said, “Don’t change the subject!”

Buddha always changes the subject; whenever you ask about God he talks about something else, immediately. He simply bypasses the subject. Why? – because he does not want to say yes or no. His respect for the ultimate is so deep that to say yes would be wrong, to say no would be wrong; because yes gives a limitation as much as no gives a limitation. No word can be unlimited, each word becomes a limitation. He never defines because all definitions limit. He is so respectful of the ultimate, toward the ultimate, that he simply does not talk about it. He will not even say this much, that “nothing can be said about it.”
Once he was asked, “If you don’t want to say anything about God, why don’t you at least say that nothing can be said about it? Because that’s what the seers of the Upanishads have been saying: ‘Nothing can be said about it. God is anirvachana, unspeakable, indefinable, ineffable.’ Why can’t you say this much, that nothing can be said about him?” And Buddha replied, “Even to say that would be saying something about him.”
You see the delicate point? Even to say that would be saying something about him. If nothing can be said about him you have said something already, you have given a definition already. If you say he is indefinable, then that is your definition. If you say he is unspeakable, you have spoken. There has been a long tradition of many mystics who have simply kept quiet, who have not uttered a single word.
But you have come here, Satya Prakash, with a certain idea, conclusion. You already believe in God, now you are searching for the way. Your name makes me suspect that you may belong to one of the most fanatical religious sects that has developed in this country during the last century, Arya Samaj, because this name, Satya Prakash, is usually used by the Arya Samajis, the followers of Dayanand. It is one of the most fanatical sects that has evolved in this liberal country; it is almost as fanatical as the Mohammedans.
Now a bill is coming in the Indian parliament called “Freedom of Religion.” It is supported by Arya Samajis all over the country; they are the only supporters of it. The name is just the opposite of what it really means to do: if it becomes a law then it will be impossible for anybody in India to change their religion.
It is called “Freedom of Religion,” but it will destroy all freedom of choice. It is basically against the Christians who convert Hindus, saying that no conversion should be allowed. The Christians are against it; they are demonstrating all over the country, making resolutions that it should not become law. Only the Christians are against it, and only the Arya Samajis are for it; both are in the same boat and nobody else is saying anything. The Arya Samajis’ concern is that no Hindu should ever leave the Hindu fold, and the Christians’ interest is that they should be able to convert as many Hindus as they can into Christians, by fair means or foul.
Satya Prakash, you may be an Arya Samaji. And my experience of different religious people is that the Arya Samajis seem to be the most closed; Jainas, Buddhists, Hindus, Sikhs are not so closed. Arya Samaj is a reaction against the Mohammedans and the Christians. In fact Arya Samaj should not be counted as an Indian religion at all; it is a reaction against Christianity and Mohammedanism, and reactions always reflect the original source. It is like the Christians and like the Mohammedans: very closed, adamant, stubborn.
If you are not an Arya Samaji, very good. If you are, please drop it. Only then can you understand what I am saying to you, and only then will it not be confusing; otherwise you will become crazy.
You say, “What is wrong with me?” This is wrong with you: that you are listening with all kinds of prejudice. Listen with no mind, listen being neither for nor against. I am not saying to believe whatsoever I say, no, not at all. There is no need to believe, but there is no need to disbelieve either; simply listen. Why can’t you simply listen?
And there is a beauty in truth. If you are listening silently without being for or against, when truth is uttered, it immediately stirs your heart. A dance arises in your being, you start feeling deep sympathy. And finally you become so deeply attuned to the utterance that there is no time to think about whether you believe it or not. If it is not truth, no bell rings in your heart, you remain unaffected by it – but no decision is needed by the mind.
And one thing more: my whole effort here is to confuse you because unless I confuse you I cannot create clarity. You are settled, you are certain; I have to shake you, shock you, I have to confuse you. Only then will you start seeking and searching for new planes of clarity. So in a way this is good, this is not wrong; it is good that you are confused. Something is happening – your foundations are being shaken.

They were seated on adjoining stools in a dimly lighted cocktail lounge. “Honey,” he said, “what about forgetting your inhibitions and spending a quiet weekend with me in Atlantic City?”
“See here,” she answered, “after an exhaustive perusal of the corpus of documented evidence garnered by research on heterosexuality as applied to contemporary sociological mores, and in view of the innate predisposition to the more exotic manifestations of concupiscence evident in your demeanor, a categorical negative is my answer.”
“But honey,” he said, “I just don’t get it.”
“That’s what I mean,” she answered.

That’s what I mean. If you are confused, it is a good sign, it shows intelligence. Only an intelligent person can be confused. A stupid person cannot be confused; you cannot shake him, you cannot shock him. He is absolutely certain. Remember, only fools are absolutely certain.

Mulla Nasruddin was saying to one of his disciples, “Never be absolutely certain because only fools are absolutely certain.”
The disciple asked, “Mulla, are you absolutely certain about that?”
And Mulla Nasruddin said, “Yes!”

An intelligent person is always ready to hesitate. The more intelligent you are, the more easily you become available to hesitation because each hesitation is a new beginning, a new search, a new inquiry.
But if you have come here not to be confused, if you have come here to gain more certainty – not clarity but certainty – if you have come here to attain more knowledge so that you can become wiser, so that you can attain to God more easily, more certainly; so that not only in this life but in the afterlife you have a guarantee, an insurance; if you have come to find a certain catechism, certain principles, fixed theories, dogmas – then you have come to the wrong place.
I am not a scripture, I am a living light. You can learn how to see by being with me, but I will not give you any commandments. And commandments never help anyway because life goes on changing and principles are always out-of-date.

A devoted husband commissioned a Frenchman to paint his wife’s portrait. She was quite nervous during the first sitting and said to the painter, “I realize I am not young anymore. I would like a good likeness, but please paint me with sympathy.”
When the portrait was completed, the husband gave a party and invited a hundred friends to the unveiling. The cover was removed, and revealed a beautiful likeness of his wife. But a gasp of horror went through the audience because the picture showed a man’s hand reaching into the lady’s bosom.
“How dare you insult my wife like this!” shouted the irate husband.
“Insult your wife?” exclaimed the painter. “How can you accuse me of that? I did everything I could to please her. She asked me to paint her with sympathy, and when I looked up the word sympathy in your dictionary, it said: ‘A fellow feeling in your bosom.’”

Enough for today.

============================================================

Inside this clay jug there are canyons and pine mountains, and the maker of canyons and pine mountains!
All seven oceans are inside and hundreds of millions of stars.
The acid that tests gold is there, and the one who judges jewels.
And the music from the strings no one touches, and the source of all water.

If you want the truth, I will tell you the truth:
friend, listen: the god whom I love is inside.

Why should we two ever want to part?
Just as the leaf of the water rhubarb lives floating on the water,
we live as the great one and the little one.

As the owl opens his eyes all night to the moon,
we live as the great one and little one.

This love between us goes back to the first humans;
it cannot be annihilated.

Here is Kabir’s idea: as the river gives itself into the ocean,
what is inside me moves inside you.
T. S. Eliot says, in “Choruses from ‘The Rock’”:
But it seems that something has happened that has never happened before: though we know not just when, or why, or how, or where.
Men have left GOD not for other gods, they say, but for no god; and this has never happened before
That men both deny gods and worship gods, professing first Reason,
And then Money, and Power, and what they call Life, or Race, or Dialectic.
The Church disowned, the tower overthrown, the bells upturned, and what have we to do
But stand with empty hands and palms turned upwards
In an age which advances progressively backwards?
Yes, something has happened that has never happened before: for the first time in the evolution of human consciousness man stands alienated from God. Man stands separated from existence. Man stands lonely, with no companion, in great darkness, with no light to lead him, guide him. Man has never been in such despair, man has never been in such a state of homelessness.
T. S. Eliot is right: “…something has happened that has never happened before…” And why has it happened? How has it happened? It is difficult to pinpoint, but not difficult to vaguely understand. These things are not very tangible and they don’t happen in a certain moment. They happen so gradually, so slowly, that no-one ever really becomes aware of when, where, how; but a few things can be understood.
Man had always lived with nature. To live with nature is to live with God in an indirect way because nature reflects God in a thousand and one ways. The growing trees and the faraway call of the cuckoo, the wind in the pine trees and the rivers moving toward the ocean, the proud mountains standing in the sun and the starry night: it is impossible not to be reminded of some invisible hand. It is impossible not to feel this tremendous harmony. It is impossible not to see that existence is not dead but alive. The ocean heaves, breathes; the whole of existence is a growing phenomenon. It is not dead, it cannot be dead – everything is growing.
Because of this experience of growing, man has been constantly aware of some invisible, mysterious force behind everything. That force is called God. God is not a person, let me repeat, only a presence. Still now, when you go deep into the Himalayas, you again start feeling a kind of reverence, awe, wonder; again you start feeling something that was very easily available to primitive man.
Civilized man has lost something because now we live in a man-made world where it is almost impossible to find the signature of God. How can you find God on asphalt roads? They don’t grow, they don’t breathe. How can you find God in cement structures? They are not alive. How can you find God in machines, in technology? Although there is great technology, even the greatest machine cannot give you a sense of the mysterious, of the miraculous. Facing even the greatest machine you cannot feel awe, you cannot feel reverence, you cannot feel like falling on your knees and praying. And if you cannot feel like falling on your knees and praying once in a while, how can God remain a part of your being? How can you remain alert, aware of the divine?
Yes, “…something has happened that has never happened before: though we know not just when, or why, or how, or where.” It is difficult to pinpoint the exact date and time when God died, when – at least in our consciousness – God disappeared from our world. And with him, disappeared all poetry; with him, disappeared all dance; with him, disappeared all that is beautiful and sacred; with him, disappeared all which one can live and die for – now we don’t have anything worth living for or worth dying for. We are simply dragging out our existence; burdened, seeing no point in it all; just carrying on somehow because the only alternative is suicide. That too seems pointless. To live seems pointless, to die seems pointless.
Man is facing a tremendous flood of meaninglessness for the first time. Everything seems to be utterly insignificant, and the reason is simple: without God there can be no significance, without God there can be no grandeur, without God there can be no splendor. Life can have meaning only in the context of something that surpasses life. The meaning always comes from the context; now man stands without a context. Meaning comes only when you can look upward to something bigger than you, something greater than you. When you feel related to something greater, holier, your life has meaning. When you feel unrelated, uprooted, how can you feel meaning?
The first thing that has happened is that man has left nature and created an artificial world of his own. This most shattering phenomenon has disrupted him, unbridged man from God and all that God implies: meaning, significance, majesty, love, prayer, meditation, all that is valuable, precious. Man has never been such a beggar as he is today.
The irony is, man has never been so rich, so affluent, as he is today. Two things have happened together: the inner has become poorer and poorer, and the outer has become richer and richer. We have more money than any other society before, we have more medical facilities than any other society before, we have in every way more power than any other society ever had. And still no society has ever felt such meaninglessness; no society has ever felt such suicidal desire, such longing.
Secondly, we have cultivated reason too much and become lopsided. God is feeling, God is not thinking. You cannot think about God because God is not an object to think about. Science thinks, religion feels. Science functions from the head, religion from the heart. Our whole education, our whole civilization, is obsessed with the head because it has made possible all kinds of technological advances. And because we have become too obsessed with the head we think reason is everything.
What can the heart give to us? No, it cannot give you great technology, it cannot give you great industry, it cannot give you money. But it can give you joy, it can give you celebration, it can give you a tremendous feeling for beauty, for music, for poetry; it can guide you into the world of love, and ultimately into the world of prayer – but these things are not commodities. You cannot grow your bank balance through the heart; and you cannot fight great wars, and you cannot make atom bombs and hydrogen bombs, and you cannot destroy people through the heart. The heart knows only how to create and the head knows only how to destroy. The head is destructive, and our whole education has become trapped in it.
Our universities, our colleges, our schools, are all destroying humanity. They think they are serving it, but they are simply befooling themselves. Unless man becomes balanced, unless the heart and the head both grow, man will remain in misery and the misery will go on growing. As we become more and more hung up in the head, as we become more and more oblivious to the existence of the heart, we will become more and more miserable. We are creating hell on the earth, and we will create more and more of it. Paradise belongs to the heart.
That is the third thing that has happened: the heart has been completely forgotten, nobody understands its language anymore. We understand logic, we don’t understand love. We understand mathematics, we don’t understand music. We become more and more accustomed to the ways of the world and nobody seems to have the guts to move onto the unknown paths of the heart, the unknown labyrinths of love. We have become very much attuned to the world of prose, and poetry has simply become nonexistential.
The poet is the bridge between the scientist and the mystic. And the poet has died, the bridge has disappeared. On one hand stand the scientists – very powerful, tremendously powerful, ready to destroy the whole earth, the whole of life. And on the other hand, few and far between, stand the mystics – Buddha, Jesus, Zarathustra, Kabir. They are utterly powerless in the sense that we understand power, but immensely powerful in a totally different sense – and we don’t know that language at all. The poet has died, that is the greatest calamity. The poet is disappearing.
And by “poet,” I mean the painter, the sculptor. All that is creative in man is becoming reduced to producing more and more commodities. The creative is losing its grip and the productive is becoming the goal of life.
God can be approached only through the creative. Why? – because he is the creator. If you want to know God, you will have to have something similar because only the same can meet the same. You will have to learn a little of the rhythm of creativity. When the musician is in a really creative mood, in a creative space, he disappears; God starts playing on the flute. Suddenly the musician’s flute is no longer in his own hands, it is in Krishna’s hands. And then the flute brings something from the beyond, something virgin, something utterly new. When the painter disappears, his hands are just the instruments of God.
God is creativity, so if you really want to enter the world of God you will have to learn the ways of creativity – but they have disappeared. Instead of creativity we value productivity; we talk about how to produce more. Production can give you things, but it cannot give you values. Production can make you rich outwardly, but it will impoverish you inwardly. Production is not creation. Production is very mediocre; any stupid person can do it, he simply needs to learn the knack of it. Creativity is intelligence. The deeper you go into creativity, the more meditative you become.
The poet has died, the poet exists no more. And what exists in the name of poetry is almost prose. What exists in the name of painting is more or less insane. You can see Picasso, Dali and others – it is pathological! Picasso was a genius, but ill, pathological. His painting was nothing but a catharsis; it helped him, it was a kind of vomiting. When you have something wrong with your stomach the vomiting relieves you. It helped Picasso; if he had been prevented from painting he would have gone mad. Painting was good for him, it saved him from becoming insane, it released his insanity onto the canvas. But what about the others who will be purchasing those paintings, hanging them in their bedrooms and looking at them? – they will start becoming ill at ease.
I am talking about a totally different sort of creativity. The Taj Mahal – just watching it on a full-moon night, great meditation is bound to arise in you. Or the temples of Khajuraho, Konarak, Puri – just meditate on them and you will be surprised, all your sexuality is transformed into love. These structures are miracles of creativity; they were not created by pathological people, they were created by those who had attained.
The great cathedrals of Europe are the longing of the earth to reach the sky. Just seeing those great creations, a great song is bound to arise in your heart, or a great silence is bound to descend on you. Man has lost the poetic urge, the creative urge – or it has been killed. We are too interested in commodities, in gadgets, in making more and more things. Production is concerned with quantity, and creation is concerned with quality. The quality has disappeared and, with the quality, God has disappeared – because God is the ultimate quality of creation.
You will have to bring the heart back. You will have to be aware of nature again. You will have to learn to watch roses, lotuses again. You will have to make contact with the trees and the rocks and the rivers. You will have to start a dialogue with the stars again. Otherwise God cannot be brought back to humanity, and without God humanity is doomed, is lost.
Yes, T. S. Eliot is right: “…something has happened that has never happened before: though we know not just when, or why, or how, or where. Men have left GOD not for other gods…”
In the past, people used to move from one god to another. It was quite usual and really very significant, it was an evolution. Naturally, the God of Moses was less sophisticated than the God of Jesus – there are thousands of years between those two enlightened beings. Moses was as enlightened as Jesus, but he had to use a language that could be understood by his people, and they were very primitive. Hence, Moses spoke in the language of law and commandments: do this, don’t do that. Law was his central emphasis.
By the time Jesus arrived man had evolved. Jesus talked about love, not about law. Love was his law. Now love is a higher value than law, certainly holier than law. Law is mundane. The God of the Jews was a jealous God – because we make our God in our own image. The God of the Jews was a very angry God, he would destroy cities for little reason. If just one person committed a sin, God could destroy the whole town. And what was the ancient concept of sin? – just disobeying a certain commandment. God was very angry, violent. But it was not really God who was violent and angry, it was the people. Their eyes were so full of violence and anger that they could not see the real God.
God is always the same, remember this. It was exactly the same when Moses was alive, it was exactly the same when Jesus was alive, it is exactly the same now, when we are alive; it will remain the same. God is always the same, but our eyes change.
Jesus could see God as love, as compassion. God was growing because man was growing; man was changing one god for another, for a higher conception of God. Man has always been changing gods, and that’s perfectly right. When we change, how can our rudimentary ideas of God remain the same? When our eyes change everything changes.
There is a very beautiful story…

There was a great saint, Ramdas. Thousands of years after Rama walked on the earth, Ramdas was reciting his story again – after thousands of years. The way he used to tell the story of Rama was so enchanting, so magnetic, so charismatic, that Hanuman, an absolute devotee of Rama – he had seen everything with his own eyes – used to come to listen to Ramdas. He would sit in the crowd, in disguise of course, and enjoy it very much.
Sometimes it happens that when you were involved in something, the action itself, you cannot get a perspective on it, you can’t see the whole thing. You were involved in it, you were doing your own thing, and there were a thousand and one things going on; you could not watch all of it.
The life of Rama was over now, completed. Ramdas was telling his disciples the story, and Hanuman was very happy, utterly glad to come and listen. Many things he had only heard of through rumors, and now he was hearing them again from an authentic source.
But one day a problem arose. Ramdas was describing when Ramana stole Rama’s wife, Sita. Ramana kept her on Sri Lanka in a beautiful garden full of white flowers. Ramdas was telling that part of the story – when Ramana kept Sita in a beautiful garden full of white flowers.
Now Hanuman had visited Sita in the garden and had not seen a single white flower – he had seen red flowers. So he stood up. He forgot that he should not interfere, that he was not expected to be there at all. He stood up and said, “Excuse me, everything else is okay, but there was not a single white flower: this you have got wrong. All the flowers were red, blood red. Change it.”
Ramdas said, “Who are you to correct me? Sit quietly.”
In anger, Hanuman threw his blanket off. He was a monkey god, so he appeared out of the blanket with his tail and everything. He said, “You ask me who I am? I am the Hanuman you are talking about. I am the man who went to the garden. You never went, you were never there – and after thousands of years you are telling the story? You have got some nerve! You are telling me to keep quiet? I cannot keep quiet! Change the story – the flowers were red, absolutely red.”
But Ramdas said, “Don’t be stupid. In the first place, you are not meant to be here. In the second place, you may have been in the garden, but I cannot change the story. I know for sure that the flowers were white.”
This was too much. Hanuman was an eye-witness, and five thousand years later this man was just making up the story. He seemed to be very stubborn: he was saying, “Be silent! Don’t be monkeyish! I know who you are – just keep quiet.” Not only that, this man was calling Hanuman stupid.
Hanuman said, “I cannot allow this. You will have to come with me, I will take you to Rama. Only Rama can decide now – and this has to be decided.”
So Hanuman took Ramdas on his shoulders, flew back to heaven, went to Rama, and said angrily, “Look at this man! After five thousand years he is making up this story. Tell him to change it. I love his stories, he is a beautiful storyteller and I have not objected to anything else where I was not an eye-witness, but he is not ready to listen to me about things I was involved in. He goes on insisting the flowers were white, and they were all red. Not only that, he is calling me stupid, and telling me, ‘Be quiet, don’t disturb me and don’t interfere.’ I say again: the flowers were red. What do you say?”
Rama said, “Hanuman, Ramdas is right – the flowers were white. Because my wife had been stolen, you were so angry your eyes were full of blood. Hence, you saw the flowers as red. You should not interfere. When a person like Ramdas says something, it cannot be changed. It is not a question of time; for a man like Ramdas there is no time. Five thousand or fifty thousand years, it doesn’t make any difference; he has entered eternity, all time has disappeared. When he is telling the story he is not only telling the story, he is seeing it too; it is not something of the past. For him there is no question of time.”
Now this was really too much! Hanuman said, “You also were not there. You didn’t go into the garden, so who are you? I was there! This is unfair! You are being partial, unjust. Ask Sita, she was there – and I hope she will not be unfair.”
Sita started laughing and said, “Hanuman, simply apologize – the flowers were white. You were just so angry that you could not see them; you were so bloodthirsty you imposed your anger on the flowers. Just apologize to Ramdas. In the first place you need not go to listen, and if you do, then make a point of keeping hidden and not interfering; nothing can be changed. Whatsoever Ramdas is saying is right because he has a more aloof, distant witnessing than you can ever have – you were too involved.

That’s how it has been. When Moses talked about God, he talked about a God which the Jews of his time could understand. When Jesus talked about God of course, three thousand years had passed, man had grown, come of age; it was possible to talk about love. Some people at least could understand him – some, but not many. Hence he was crucified because many could not yet understand.
In the past, people were changing their gods. One of the Indian incarnations of God is Parasuram – he killed millions of people, his whole life was that of a killer. Another incarnation of God is Buddha – he was absolutely nonviolent; he would not kill even an ant. Between the time of Parasuram and Buddha much water flowed down the Ganges. Buddha brought a new concept of God, a new vision; it is the same God, but Buddha gives you new eyes.
In the past people were changing gods, but in the present day something else has happened: “Men have left GOD not for other gods they say, but for no god…” Man has not left God for other gods – that would be okay – he has dropped the whole idea of God, the whole idea of a divine presence in existence, the whole idea of any meaning, the whole idea that existence is alive, conscious. And now we are standing empty, and we are feeling empty.
But man cannot remain empty; it is difficult to remain empty. Just as nature abhors a vacuum, so is the case with man’s inner nature – “…men both deny gods and worship gods…” So there came a new phenomenon: man created his own gods.
He didn’t worship God the Father, the Holy Ghost and Jesus Christ anymore; he changed that old trinity. He worshipped a new trinity: Karl Marx, Friedrich Engels and Vladimir Lenin. Now this is very ordinary – to worship Karl Marx or Engels or Lenin is to worship something very ordinary. And remember, whatsoever you worship you will become because deep down your worship is your longing.
“…professing first Reason…” Because man cannot remain empty for long, he first replaced the emptiness with reason. Reason became God, the head became God. So anything proved by reason was truth, anything not proved by reason was untruth. Now this is nonsense: reason is limited, it cannot prove many things. For example, it cannot prove the beauty of a rose, but the beauty exists; reason is impotent to prove it. Reason cannot prove the existence of love, but love exists; reason is inadequate to prove it. If you ask reason about music it will say it is only noise; it may be arranged in such a way that it gives an illusion of melody, but there is no melody, only noise; reason is blind, it cannot see the melody. Yes, reason has certain qualities, but only certain qualities; the whole of existence is not available to it.
And then money became God. Millions of people worship money as God. You will be surprised to know that this country, India, which goes on bragging about its spirituality, bragging that it is destined to lead the whole of humanity toward spirituality, worships money more than any other country – actually worships it! There is a festival, the Festival of Lights, Diwali, when people worship money – they actually worship notes, coins: money is God. In other countries they may not be actually worshipping, but unconsciously the worship is there.
And power has become a god. The politician has become the most important person in the world. The dirtiest politician is thought to be something superhuman. We have denied God, but how can we deny our emptiness? We have rejected God, and we have to stuff something into the empty space, so we stuff it with political power, with money, with reason, with race, with dialectics – if you cannot find anything else, then dialectical materialism, the philosophy of communism, fascism, Nazism.
Man cannot live without religion. Man cannot live without God. If the true God is not available, man is bound to create homemade gods. “The Church disowned, the tower overthrown, the bells upturned, and what have we to do but stand with empty hands and palms turned upward in an age which advances progressively backward?” Yes, T. S. Eliot is right.
With this background, try to understand Kabir’s sutras. They are of tremendous beauty.
Inside this clay jug there are canyons and pine mountains, and the maker of canyons and pine mountains!
The original is:
Is ghat antar bag-bagiche, isee men sirjanhara,
is ghat antar sat samundar, isee men nau lakh tara.
Kabir says if you drop the mind, if even for a single moment you become pure consciousness, the difference between the inside and the outside will disappear. Then the inside will be the outside and the outside will be the inside, because the only thing that separates you from the outer is the glass wall of your thoughts. Once this is not there a miracle happens: you find the whole of existence inside you. You become so vast.
Is ghat antar bag-bagiche… Then all the gardens and all the roses and all the lotuses are within you.
…isee men sirjanhara… And it is not only that the roses are in you and the stars are in you – the one who created them is also within you.
…is ghat antar sat samundar… The seven seas are within you.
…isee men nau lakh tara. And millions of stars are within you. Once the mind is dropped, the inner and outer meet, merge into each other and become one. This small body is not as small as you think, it is a temple of God.
Inside this clay jug… If you look at it from the outside it is nothing but clay, it is nothing but dust. Omar Khayyam says, “Dust unto dust” – but man is not only dust, although the idea has been very persistent. Do you know that the word human comes from humus? Humus means dust, earth, clay. The word adam comes from the same root; adam means earth. If you look from the outside, man is made of clay; if you look at him scientifically he is clay.
It is like looking at poetry scientifically: you will find words but not poetry. Poetry is something between the words, in the gaps and between the lines, in the intervals. You need a totally different kind of sensitivity to understand poetry. Just the words are not poetry; the words are language, grammar. And what are words? – just different combinations of the alphabet. Where is the poetry? If you dissect the poetry – even the greatest poetry, of a Kalidas, Milton or Rabindranath – if you dissect it, what will you find? Only words! And if you dissect the words, then just the alphabet.
It happened…

A great spiritual preacher invited Mark Twain to one of his sermons. They were friends, but Mark Twain had never gone to listen to him. And the preacher wanted him to listen; he wanted him to know the art of his preaching, he wanted to be appreciated. He insisted again and again, and one day Mark Twain went with him. The preacher had prepared his best sermon. He talked beautifully, he made people as if drunk. But he was very much puzzled and embarrassed too because Mark Twain was just sitting in front of him absolutely unimpressed, uninfluenced.
The sermon finished, and they were going back home. But, not even for a few moments could the preacher gather the courage to ask Mark Twain what he was thinking. And Mark Twain didn’t say a single word.
Finally, when they were getting down from the carriage, the preacher gathered enough courage and said, “At least you owe me a few words. How did you like my sermon? Even if you did not like it, you can say so. But don’t keep so silent – it hurts.”
Mark Twain said, “There was no question of liking it or disliking it. You are a thief. Only last night I was reading something in which is written every single word that you uttered this morning. You are a thief and nothing else.”
The priest was shocked. He said, “That is impossible, I haven’t stolen from anywhere. Show me the book.”
And Mark Twain said, “Tomorrow morning I will send the book to you.”
And do you know what happened? The next morning Mark Twain sent him a big dictionary, and he wrote, “Do you see: every single word that you spoke is in this book.”

Poetry is not just words, poetry is something totally different. The words only create the space for the poetry to become visible. The words only create a context for the poetry to descend from the beyond.
Man’s body is not just clay, it is clay plus God. If you look from the outside it is clay, but if you start looking from the inside it is the whole universe.
All seven oceans are inside, and hundreds of millions of stars.
The acid that tests gold is there, and the one who judges jewels.
And the music from the strings no one touches, and the source of all water.
The original is far more beautiful, and the reason is the same as I have been saying. The original is poetry, and it is very difficult to translate poetry from one language to another. Prose can be translated easily. Poetry cannot be translated, never adequately. Something is missing because each language has its own nuances, its own flavor; you cannot bring that flavor and nuance to another language.
The original is:
Is ghat antar paras moti, isee men parkhanhara,
is ghat antar anahad garje, isee men uthat fuhara,

kahat Kabir suno bhai sadho, isee men sai hamara.
A paras, touchstone, is a specific symbol in Eastern alchemy. In the West, alchemists have been searching down the ages for the secret of transforming base metals into higher metals, into gold; searching for ways and means, chemical ways to transform the lower into the higher, the nonprecious into the precious. In the East also, there has been the same search, but there they have a different metaphor for it. They call it a paras. A paras is a stone, a miracle stone. If any base metal is touched by the paras it immediately becomes gold. No other chemistry, no other chemical processes are needed, just the touch of the paras. It is a metaphor: in fact it stands for the master. Just the touch of the master, just the touch of his energy, immediately transforms the ignorant into the wise one, immediately transforms darkness into light, death into immortality. Paras is a metaphor for the master.
Is ghat antar paras moti… Within you exists the miracle stone. If you know how to use it everything will become gold, everything will be transformed into diamonds.
…isee men parkhanhara… And the one who can recognize this miracle stone is also present in you. You are not to ask anybody else. Your own witnessing self, your own pure consciousness, is the one who knows already where the precious stone is hidden in you. You just have to discard the garbage of the mind, the garbage that has been given to you by society. You just have to be alone in yourself. When the mind drops all the contents given by society, the witness arises in you.
…is ghat antar anakad garje… And deep within you there is music which is not created by anybody, which is not created by any hand, which is not produced on any instrument. There is a special name for it: it is called anahat.
When you play on a guitar it is called ahat because you strike the strings with your fingers; Ahat means striking. The musician is struggling to create music on the instrument, it is created out of conflict, there is a little aggression in it, there is struggle, there is a kind of fight. In the innermost recess of your being there is neither instrument nor musician, but music is there – without the musician and without the instrument.
Zen people call it “the sound of one hand clapping.” The Christian mystics call it “the soundless sound.” It is silence, and yet it is musical silence.
Again, the words of T. S. Eliot are significant:
At the still point of the turning world. Neither flesh nor fleshless;
Neither from nor toward; at the still point where the dance is.
But neither arrest nor movement. And do not call it fixity,
Where past and future are gathered…. Except for the still point,
There would be no dance, and there is only the dance.
“…the still point…” There is a point within you where nothing ever moves – no movement from or to, no stirring, no sound created by any instrument. Nobody is there, just stillness, but that stillness is the dance and that stillness is the music. It is called anahat.
…is ghat antar anahad garje, isee men uthat fuhara… And the moment you have heard that music, a great fountain bursts forth, of joy, of bliss. You become a rejoicing, you become a dance yourself, you become a song yourself. Then your life is religious. Not like the so-called saints – sad, serious and ugly. The really religious person is one whose inner wells have started flowing, who has become a fountain of joy, of song and dance and celebration.
And the music from the strings no one touches, and the source of all water.

If you want the truth, I will tell you the truth:
friend, listen: the god whom I love is inside.
Kabir says: If you want the truth… Truth cannot be imposed upon you, it cannot be forced upon you. Unless you desire and long for it, unless you spread your hands, unless you are ready to receive it with great longing and intensity, unless longing becomes a fire in you, it cannot be given to you. No master can give it to you, but you can take it. If you have fire enough, it will be transferred to you. It is a transmission beyond scriptures.
If you want the truth – Kabir says – I will tell you the truth… I am ready to tell you, I am ready to share my truth, my experience with you. But, friend, you will have to listen. Just hearing won’t do, you will have to listen.
Listening is totally different from hearing. Hearing, anybody who is not deaf can do. Listening is a rare art, one of the last arts. Listening means not only hearing with the ears, but hearing from the heart in utter silence, in absolute peace, with no resistance. One has to be vulnerable to listen, and one has to be deep in love to listen. One has to be in utter surrender to listen.
…friend, listen: the god whom I love is inside. Kabir says, I have found him within myself. I searched for him everywhere, and all the searching was nothing but frustration. Then I looked within and he was there, laughing, smiling at all my stupid searching. It was so ridiculous: I was searching for the one who is already present within me.
…kahat Kabir suno bhai sadho, isee men sai hamara. In this ordinary body of clay, God resides. Hence, don’t be against the body; notwithstanding what your foolish saints go on saying to you, don’t be against the body. Love it, respect it, it is the temple of God. It may be clay in the eyes of the scientist, but in the eyes of the mystic, God has chosen it to be his abode.
Why should we two ever want to part?

Mohi-tohi lagi kaise chute…
The original says: we have fallen in such love that now it cannot be broken. We have fallen into each other so deeply that we cannot be separated. No sword can cut us apart, it is impossible.
Mohi-tohi lagi kaise chute… Now even if somebody wants to separate us and tries to, it is impossible. Even you cannot separate us. I am no more, only you are. Who can you separate from whom?
Why should we two ever want to part? The translation misses, it misses the point. It is not a question of Why should we two ever want to part? No, even if we want to, there is no possibility of parting. The mystic, once he knows that God is within, has gone beyond the point of parting. There is no possibility of any divorce anymore. He is really married. And the marriage is not just a formality, the marriage is like a welding. He is welded with God – not only wedded but welded. He has become one, just like the river disappears into the ocean – how can you separate it? Just as the milk becomes one with the water – how can you separate it?
Just as the leaf of the water rhubarb lives floating on the water,
we live as the great one and little one.

…jaise kamalpatra jal basa,
aise tum sahib ham dasa…
The lotus leaf has been a symbol of great importance. Down the ages, it is impossible to find a mystic who has never talked about it – all the buddhas have talked about it. They had to talk about it because it represents something so significant that it cannot be ignored. It represents the very essence of sannyas.
There is one thing of great importance about the lotus leaf: it lives in water, it floats on water, but the water cannot touch it. During the night dewdrops gather on the lotus leaf but they remain separate – just like pearls, separate; they cannot touch the lotus leaf. The lotus leaf remains untouched in the water; it remains in the water and yet aloof, distant, faraway. That’s how the mystic lives, how the sannyasin has to live: in the world and yet not of the world.
Jaise kamalpatra jal basa, aise tum sahib ham dasa… Kabir says, I am living in this world, but this world is not my master. You are my master. I am living in this world because this is what you want me to do; I am simply following your orders. I am living in this world because I am just a slave to your love, I am just a shadow of you. I have no interest in the world: I am not after money, I am not after power, I am not after prestige. But if you want me to be in the marketplace, then it is perfectly okay. If you want me anywhere, I am ready to go there.
There is a story in Buddha’s life…

One day one of Buddha’s sannyasins was passing along a street where he had gone to beg. The most beautiful woman of that town, the prostitute of the town, fell in love with this monk. She came out of her house and asked the monk to come and stay with her. The rainy season was coming soon, so the prostitute said, “Why don’t you stay with me during the rainy season?”
Because monks have to stay somewhere.
“During the rainy season,” the prostitute said, “for four months, monks don’t move. You will have to stay somewhere, you will have to find some shelter – why not with me?”
He said, “That’s perfectly okay. I will just have to ask my master, ask his permission. If he says yes, tomorrow morning I will be at your door.”
The prostitute could not believe the way the monk said it so simply, as if there was no problem. He said, “I have to stay somewhere. I was going to ask somebody to give me shelter for the four months, and this from you is a gift. I just have to ask my master, ‘Can I stay with her?’ That is the way, it is just a formal request. I have to tell him that a certain woman has requested that I stay with her.”
The other monks heard about it, and of course they were jealous. This was too much, it was impossible to tolerate. But they waited. They waited because they thought Buddha would absolutely say no, would categorically say no. A sannyasin, and staying with a prostitute?
But when the monk asked Buddha, Buddha looked at the monk and said, “Perfectly right. You can stay with her.”
Now the other monks stood up and said, “This is not fair. Don’t you see the risk? This is a young man, and that woman is almost a magician. Even great kings are entrapped by her, and this young man is almost innocent. She is not interested in giving him shelter, she has become lustful toward his beautiful body. And you say yes?”
Buddha said, “Wait. We will decide who is right after four months. Let him go and stay with the woman.”
Those four months seemed very long for the other monks. It was really difficult to wait, but they knew Buddha was going to be proved wrong. Living with that woman for four months? She could not leave the monk alone, she would seduce him – it was absolutely certain.
After four months the monk came back and touched Buddha’s feet. The others said, “Now tell us the truth – what happened?”
The monk said, “Just wait a few minutes because the woman herself is coming and it will be better for you to hear it from the horse’s mouth.”
And the woman came and touched Buddha’s feet, and she asked to be initiated into sannyas.
Buddha asked, “Why?”
She said, “I tried to seduce him, but I failed. He seduced me. He seduced me into sannyas. For four months I tried every possible way, but he remained like a lotus leaf. I would dance naked around him and he would meditate. I have never failed in my life, this is the first time. For the first time I am impressed by a man; for the first time I have encountered a man. Up to now I have seen only slaves. They may have been great kings, but they all touched the dust on my feet. This is the only man I have seen who remained like a lotus leaf.
“I tried every possible way: good food, a beautiful room, a beautiful bed, beautiful clothes, every possible comfort for him – and he would never say no – but I failed. I could not distract him. And he used to laugh at me. I would dance my most cherished dances and I would start throwing my clothes off, waiting that some lust might arise in his eyes – but it never did. He would laugh and giggle, and he would say, ‘What are you doing? It is too cold, you will catch cold.’ He has transformed me. Now I would like to become the same, a lotus leaf.”

Jaise kamalpatra jal basa, aise tum sahib ham dasa… You are my master, I am your shadow; wherever you go, I go. If you take me into the world, it is perfectly okay. If you take me out of the world, it is perfectly okay. I can only say yes. Every dance is your dance. Who am I to say no? This is the ultimate meaning of sannyas: not renunciation but rejoicing.

It is said, by John in the Acts, that on the last night, when Jesus was departing from his disciples:
…[Jesus] gathered all of us together and said: Before I am delivered up unto them let us sing a hymn to the Father, and so go forth to that which lieth before us. He bade us therefore make as it were a ring, holding one another’s hands, and himself standing in the midst he said: Answer Amen unto me…

Glory be to thee, Father.
And we, going about in a ring, answered him: Amen.
Glory be to thee, Word: Glory be to thee, Grace. Amen.
Glory be to thee, Spirit: Glory be to thee, Holy One. Amen.
We praise thee, O Father; we give thanks to thee,
O Light, wherein darkness dwelleth not. Amen.
The word amen means, “Yes God, yes. If you want us to die, yes. If crucifixion is your will, yes. Thy kingdom come, thy will be done.”
That’s what Kabir is saying. He is saying, I am just a shadow to you. Wherever you go I will go. I have no desire of my own. How can I have any desire of my own? I am not, you are.
As the owl opens his eyes all night to the moon,
we live as the great one and little one.

…jaise chakor takat nis chanda,
aise tum sahib ham banda…
Chakor is a poetic metaphor. The chakor is a waterbird, not exactly an owl; you can call it a water-owl. It is not found in the West, hence there is no word for it in the English language. The chakor is a bird which is fascinated by the moon. When the full moon is in the sky he cannot sleep for the whole night. He goes on looking at the moon, for the whole night he is focused on the moon. This may not be exactly true, it may be just poetically true. Maybe the chakor has some other reason – maybe his neck is made in such a way that he cannot look anywhere else.
But he has become a significant poetic metaphor: that is the way the lover looks at the beloved, the devotee looks at the deity, the disciple looks at the master. Jaise chakor takat nis chanda… Just like the chakor which goes on looking at the moon the whole night. …aise tum sahib ham banda… Just like that I go on looking at you.
In fact when you have recognized him within you, wherever you look you look at him because he is everywhere.
This love between us goes back to the first humans:
it cannot be annihilated.

…mohi-tohi adi-ant ban ayi,
ab kaise lagan durai…
Kabir says, this love has been going on from the very beginning, and it is going to go on to the very end. There is no possibility of it being annihilated; it is the eternal love.
God is the eternal goal. Consciously or unconsciously, we are searching for him. And the day we stop searching for him we become miserable, our life becomes darkened, we lose the star that was keeping us moving. Our life becomes stagnant, there is no flow any longer. And when there is no God there is no glow either.
Here is Kabir’s idea: as the river gives itself into the ocean,
what is inside me moves inside you.

…kahe Kabir hamara man laga,
jaise sarita sindh samai.
Just as the river moves into the ocean and becomes the ocean, so has something exactly like that happened within me. …kahe Kabir hamara man laga, jaise sarita sindh samai. My own being has disappeared, my own private existence is no more. I have become just a part of you, a part of the total. I have become an organic unity with you.
And the moment you become an organic unity with God, your life becomes an orgasmic joy – joy and joy and joy. Your whole life becomes a sheer blissfulness from this end to the other end.
Sydney Carter says:
They cut me down and I leap up high;
I am the life that’ll never, never die.
I’ll live in you if you’ll live in me;
I am the Lord of the Dance, said he.

I danced in the morning when the world was begun,
And I danced in the stars and the moon and the sun,
And I came down from heaven and I danced on the earth;
At Bethlehem I had my birth.
Dance then wherever you may be;
I am the Lord of the Dance, said he.

And I’ll lead you all, wherever you may be.
I’ll lead you all in the dance, said he….
The invitation from God is constantly there:
And I’ll lead you all wherever you may be,
I’ll lead you all in the dance, said he.
Those who are ready to accept the invitation, those who are ready to open the door when God knocks, those who are ready to let him in, their lives become a dance, a dance of utter beauty.
You also can rejoice – but you can miss if you are stubborn, if you are closed, if you are not available. You are free to be miserable, remember. Misery is your own choice: you have chosen it, hence you are miserable. You can drop it instantly, right now, this very moment, herenow – just a shift of gestalt. Don’t be a separate entity. You are not, in fact – it is only an illusion that you think that you are separate. You don’t have to lose anything but your illusion of separation, and the dance begins.
And unless the dance begins, life remains futile. God is always ready, inviting, calling you forth: “Come. Come follow me. Come, be in the dance with me. Come, let me dance in you. Come, like a river comes to the ocean.”
…kahe Kabir hamara man laga, jaise sarita sindh samai. I have disappeared just like the river disappears into the ocean. And the day I disappeared was the greatest day. The day I died was the beginning of real life.
One has to be ready to die, only then does eternal life become available. It is yours, just for the asking. Gather courage, and don’t go on missing the dance of life.
Enough for today.

============================================================

The first question:
Osho,
Five years ago I had a dream in which you looked at me and said very sternly, “Why don't you go away?”
Now whenever I am in front of you, and at other times also, I feel me so strongly – I wish I would go away.
You are just holding on to something which is no longer there. You are clinging to a shadow. You are just clinging to a memory. And that is the case with many of my sannyasins – their egos are gone, there are just traces, footprints, past memories. They go on clinging to these past memories, thinking they are their egos.
It takes time to recognize the fact that you are no more. Sometimes it can take years to understand that the ego has been left somewhere on the path long before. And about you I can say it absolutely: it is only a shadow that is torturing you. The ego has disappeared, but you have not yet been able, alert… The ego has disappeared in deep love with me.
The ego disappears in two ways. When it disappears because of meditation one immediately becomes aware that it is gone because meditation means awareness and nothing else, so there is no gap. On the path of awareness the disappearance of the ego and the recognition is instantaneous, simultaneous.
But on the path of love, the ego disappears and recognition only comes later on. The path of love is the path of the drunkard. He is utterly drunk, so how can he recognize what has happened or what is happening? And when you are in love, so much goes on happening that even to take note of it all becomes more and more difficult. And when deeper things happen, it really takes time for them to be recognized.
Meditation is the way of the head. Recognition also, is a function of the head, so when meditation happens, immediately recognition happens. But love happens in the heart, and there is a great distance between love and logic, the heart and the head. In the heart you are no more, but the head is still clinging to an old idea. The bird has left the cage long ago. You are drowning in me more and more every day.

Dad was pretending to be asleep. “If I play possum,” he thought, “maybe the kids will go away.”
But they persisted in their efforts to try and rouse him from his delicious sleep. Finally his little daughter tried to open one of his eyelids, looked intently in, and reported to her brothers, “He is still in there!”

I have looked into you and I say you are not there. It will be difficult to believe what I am saying: how can you believe it unless it becomes your own recognition? But my saying it will help, it will help the recognition to happen sooner than otherwise. The news has started traveling from the heart.
Physiologically the heart and the head are very close – the distance is maybe not more than eighteen inches – but spiritually the head and the heart, these two points, are the furthest apart. Even stars are closer to you than your own heart. The greatest distance in existence is between the heart and the head, between love and logic, between intuition and intellect. Recognition happens in the intellect and love happens in the world of intuition.
And you are in love. Your path is that of love. Don’t be at all worried – you are gone, and gone forever. You cannot return even if you want to. And this is so with many of my sannyasins who are in deep love with me, who are following on the path with tremendous drunkenness, who have abandoned themselves, whose trust is total – they also will need time. But who cares about the recognition? The real thing is the realization, not the recognition.
On the path of love it is always the master who makes the disciple aware: “It has happened! Now don’t worry about it. It is already dawn and the night is gone.” It is always the master who reminds, who helps, the disciple to recognize. On the path of awareness, there is no need. The disciple himself becomes alert; alertness is his whole work.

The second question:
Osho,
Listening to you speak this morning on the different paths for different people, it struck me as strange that over the years the entire collection of my personal tapes has been of your talks on meditation, such as the Dhammapada, the Heart sutra, Yoga sutras, Shiva sutras, Hakim Sanai, and the latest, on Atisha. Also, even during the three great celebrations at the ashram, I have preferred to sit silently rather than sing and dance. Neither of these things are done deliberately though, it has just happened that way. I sometimes wonder if I am caught in the attraction of the opposite. Would you please comment?
Ajit Saraswati, you are not caught in the opposite: meditation is your path, awareness is going to be your key, the master key. Go totally with it and don’t be worried about the lovers. Many times, many things will make you jealous because those who follow the path of love will dance, they will sing, they will laugh, they will celebrate. A thousand and one flowers will bloom on their path; their eyes will sparkle, will become candles; their lives will become more and more juicy.
On the path of awareness these things don’t happen at all. Yes, a totally different kind of beauty happens – the beauty of the desert, the silence of the desert. And remember, the desert has its own beauty; all that is needed is one who can understand that beauty. There are no trees, no greenery, just an infinite expanse of sand and sand, and the patterns that the wind makes on the sand, and the starry night in the desert, and silence, utter silence.
You cannot find that silence in a garden. The birds will go on chirping, and the wind will go on blowing through the pine trees, and the fountains and the streams… And much goes on because it is a dance. In the desert it is all stillness. Those who can appreciate the beauty of a garden may not be able to appreciate the beauty of the desert; those who can feel the beauty of the desert may sometimes feel jealous of those who are living in the garden.
It is an ancient phenomenon: the follower on the path of awareness has always felt suspicious; doubts arise in him many times. That’s what is happening to Ajit. The doubt is natural because the lover displays so many things that prove that something is happening, and the meditator simply starts disappearing into his own being, into his own interiority. No flower manifests, no song bursts forth; he becomes more and more aloof, distant. Others may even start thinking that he has become sad or serious.
Vivek always asks me, “What is happening to Ajit Saraswati? Why does he look so serious? He does not even laugh at the jokes, or very rarely, and that with an effort, just as if not to feel left out.” Vivek reminds me because her path is of love; she cannot understand. It is impossible for the lover to understand that there can be any beauty in the desert, in being simply, utterly alone. But both have their beauties.
Ajit Saraswati, you need not worry, you are not attracted by the opposite. Meditation is your path. On the path of the lover you would feel strange, it wouldn’t suit you. And it is not only in this life that you are following the path of meditation: for many lives you have been following it, on and off. But this time I think it is going to remain on. There is every possibility that this may be your last life. Enjoy it deeply. Enjoy this stillness, silence – which may appear to others as seriousness, even as sadness. Don’t be confused by it, don’t be shaken by it.

The third question:
Osho,
Why am I still so scared of exposing myself?
Gita, who is not? To expose oneself creates great fear. It is natural because to expose oneself means to expose all the rubbish that you carry in your mind, the garbage which has been piling up for centuries, for many, many lives. To expose oneself means to expose all one’s weaknesses, limitations, faults. To expose oneself ultimately means to expose one’s vulnerability, death. To expose oneself means to expose one’s emptiness.
Behind all the garbage of the mind and the noise of the mind there is a dimension of utter emptiness. One is hollow without godliness, one is just empty and nothing without godliness. One wants to hide this nakedness, this emptiness, this ugliness, cover it with beautiful flowers, decorate those covers. One can at least pretend that one is something, somebody.
And this is not something personal to you; this is universal, this is the case with everybody. No one can open themselves up like a book. Fear grips you: “What will people think of me?” From your very childhood you have been taught to wear masks, beautiful masks. There is no need to have a beautiful face, just a beautiful mask will do; and the masks are cheap. To transform your face is arduous, to paint your face is very simple.
Now to suddenly expose your real face makes you shiver in the deepest core of your being; a trembling arises. Will people like it? Will people accept you? Will people still love you, respect you? Who knows? They loved your mask, they respected your character, they glorified your garments; but now fear arises: “If I suddenly become naked are they still going to love me, respect me, appreciate me, or will they all escape, run away from me? They may turn their backs on me, I may be left alone.” Hence, people go on pretending. This pretension is out of fear, and out of fear arises all pseudoness. One needs to be fearless to be authentic.
One of the fundamental laws of life is this: whatsoever you hide goes on growing, and whatsoever you expose, if it is wrong it disappears, evaporates in the sun, and if it is right it is nourished. Just the opposite happens when you hide something: the right starts dying because it is not nourished. It needs the wind and the rain and the sun; it needs the whole of nature available to it. It can grow only with truth, it feeds on truth. Stop giving it its nourishment and it starts getting thinner and thinner.
People are starving their reality and fattening their unreality. Your unreal faces feed upon lies, so you have to go on inventing more and more lies. To support one lie you will have to lie a hundred times more because a lie can only be supported by bigger lies. So when you hide behind facades the real starts dying and the unreal thrives, becomes fatter and fatter. If you expose yourself the unreal will die, is bound to die because the unreal cannot remain in the open. It can remain only in secrecy, it can remain only in darkness, it can remain only in the tunnels of your unconscious. If you bring the unreal to consciousness it starts evaporating.
That’s the whole secret of the success of psychoanalysis. It is a simple secret, but the whole secret: the psychoanalyst helps to bring up all that is inside your unconscious, in the darker realms of your being, to the level of the conscious. He brings it to the surface where you can see it, others can see it, and a miracle happens: just your seeing it is the beginning of its death. And if you can tell it to somebody else, just exposing it to a single person is enough to bring about great changes in your being. That’s what you do in psychoanalysis, you expose yourself to your psychoanalyst.
But to expose yourself to a psychoanalyst is limiting: you have exposed your secrets to only one person, in deep privacy, with the condition that he is not going to make them public. That is part of the profession of the physician, psychoanalyst, therapist, that is part of his oath: he will keep your secrets, he will not tell them to anybody. So it is a very limited exposure, but it still helps. And it is exposure to a professional, that’s why it takes years. It still helps, but what could be done within days takes years in psychoanalysis – four years, five years – and even then it is never complete. The world has not yet known a single case of total psychoanalysis, of the process completed, terminated, finished, no, not yet. Not even your psychoanalysts are completely psychoanalyzed because the exposure itself is very limited and with conditions. The psychoanalyst listens to you as if he is not listening because he is not to tell your secrets to anybody. But even then, it helps tremendously to unburden you.
If you can expose yourself religiously – not in privacy, not to the professional, but simply in all your relationships – that’s what sannyas is all about. It is self-psychoanalysis. It is twenty-four-hour psychoanalysis, day in, day out. It is psychoanalysis in all kinds of situations: with the wife, with the friend, with the relative, with the enemy, with the stranger, with the boss, with the servant. For twenty-four hours you are relating.
In the beginning it is going to be really very scary, but if you go on exposing yourself soon you will start gaining strength because once the truth is exposed it becomes stronger and the untruth dies. And with the truth becoming stronger you become rooted, you become centered. You start becoming an individual; the personality disappears and individuality appears.
Personality is bogus, individuality is substantial. Personality is just a facade, individuality is your truth. Personality is imposed from the outside; it is a persona, a mask. Individuality is your reality; it is as existence has made you. Personality is social sophistication, social polishing. Individuality is raw, wild, strong, with tremendous power.
The fear will be there only in the beginning. Hence the need for a master, so that in the beginning he can hold your hand, so that in the beginning he can support you, so that in the beginning he can take you a few steps with him. The master is not a psychoanalyst – he is that and far more. The psychoanalyst is a professional; the master is not a professional – it is not his profession to help people, it is his vocation, it is his love, it is his compassion. And because it is his compassion he takes you only as far as you need him. The moment he starts feeling that you can go on your own he starts slipping his hand out of yours. Although you would like to cling on, he cannot allow that. Once you are ready, courageous, daring, once you have tasted the freedom of truth, the freedom of exposing your reality, you can go on your own. You can be a light unto yourself.
Fear arises because of a great identity crisis. This fear is natural because from your very childhood what you have been taught is false, and you have become so identified with the false that to drop it looks almost like committing suicide. For fifty years, sixty years, you have been a certain kind of person.
Gita must be reaching sixty now. For sixty years you have been a certain kind of person. Dropping that identity now, in this last phase of your life, and starting to learn about yourself from ABC is frightening. Death is coming closer and closer every day – is this the time to start a new lesson? Who knows if you will be able to complete it or not? Who knows? You may lose your old identity and you may not have enough time, enough energy, enough courage, to attain a new identity. So are you going to die without an identity? Are you going to live in the last phase of your life without an identity? To live without an identity would be a kind of madness; the heart sinks, the heart shrinks. One thinks, “Now it is okay to go on for a few days more. It is better to live with the old, the familiar, the secure, the convenient.” You have become skilled at it. And it has been a great investment: you have put sixty years of your life into it. Somehow you have managed, somehow you have created an idea of who you are – and now I tell you to drop that idea because you are not that?
No idea is needed to know yourself. In fact, all ideas have to be dropped, only then can you know who you are. Fear is natural. Don’t condemn it, and don’t feel that it is something wrong. It is just part of your whole social upbringing. You have to accept it and go beyond it; without condemning it you have to go beyond it.
Expose slowly, slowly. There is no need to take jumps that you cannot manage; go by steps, gradually. Soon you will learn the taste of the truth, and you will be surprised that all those sixty years have been a sheer waste. Your old identity will be lost, and you will have a totally new conception. It will not really be an identity, but a new vision, a new way of seeing things, a new perspective. You will not be able to say “I” again with something behind it. You will use the word because it is useful, but you will know all the time that the word carries no meaning, no substance, no existential substance at all; that behind this “I” is hidden an ocean, infinite, vast, divine.
You will never attain another identity. Your old identity will be gone, and for the first time you will start feeling yourself as a wave in the ocean of existence. That is not an identity because you are not in it. You have disappeared, godliness has overwhelmed you. If you can risk the false, the truth can be yours. And it is worth it because you risk only the false and you gain the truth. You risk nothing and you gain all.
My work here is to somehow persuade you, seduce you this way or that, to drop the old identity. You have succeeded in being able to hide many things you have done in the past. Now opening again those closed chapters, closed chambers for no reason at all, and releasing the ghosts of the past, many, many fears will come.
You may not have been faithful to your husband once in a while, but you have been able to manage a certain face of sincerity, faithfulness. Unnecessarily exposing yourself now is bound to create fear. You may not have been faithful, but what is the point of exposing it now? Or you may have been faithful in deed, but not in thought, what is the point of exposing it? The mind will say, “There is no need. There are so many problems already, why create new ones?”
You may have succeeded in telling many lies and circulating those lies as true. You may have succeeded, and now those lies are almost truths for others, and even for you. Now going back and looking again, it is very, very natural to be afraid, to not want to look back, to not go into all those nightmares.

Harry constantly irritated his friends with his eternal optimism. No matter how bad the situation was he would always say, “It could have been worse.”
To cure him of this annoying habit his friends decided to invent a situation so completely black, so dreadful, that even Harry wouldn’t be able to find any hope in it.
Approaching him at the club bar one day, one of them said, “Harry, did you hear what happened to George? He came home last night, found his wife in bed with another man, shot them both, then turned the gun on himself.”
“Terrible!” said Harry, “but it could have been worse.”
“How in hell,” asked the dumbfounded friend, “could it possibly have been worse?”
“Well,” said Harry, “if it had happened the night before, I would be dead now.”

It is better to keep quiet, the mind says. It is better not to bring out all the old ghosts, not to release them; it is better to go on sitting on them. For sixty years you have been able to manage a certain demeanor, a certain gracefulness, a certain personality – polished, civilized, respectable. And now to suddenly expose it for no reason at all? The mind will say, “Have you gone mad? If you have waited so long, you can wait a little more.”
Little Siddhartha writes to me again and again, “Osho, I want to become part of the ashram now.” I have been telling him to wait just a little more, a little more, a little more, but he is persistent. Every month or two he asks for a darshan, and the only question he asks is, “When can I come into the ashram?”
Three or four days ago, he again wrote a letter saying, “It is time now. When am I going to be in the ashram?” So I said to Laxmi, “Tell him, within four or five days. Make any arrangements and let him come in.”
Laxmi told him, “Just wait four or five days.”
He said, “Why four or five days? Osho always says ‘Do it now!’ Why four or five days? Why wait? Why can’t I come right now? Osho’s insistence is always on the right now, here.”
Laxmi told him, “You would find it very difficult right now.” The room had to be prepared, the room had to be painted.
So he said, “Okay. If I have waited for so long, I can wait for four or five days more. If it is only a question of four or five days more, I can wait. And I have waited so long already. Okay, I will wait.”
After sixty years of life the idea simply arises in your mind that you have waited for so long, why can’t you wait for a few days more? Why create any disturbance? Why create any unnecessary ripples? Things have settled, everybody respects you: your children respect you, your husband respects you, your society respects you. It has been a hard struggle, it has been a struggle with the outside, it has been a struggle with the inside. Somehow you have repressed all that is wild in you: you have repressed sex, anger, greed, jealousy; you have repressed all that society condemns. You have somehow managed to create a beautiful character; why expose it now, in the last phase of your life? For what? What are you going to gain from it? The mind will give you all these cunning reasons – they are rationalizations.
If you have lived in a false way for sixty years, enough is enough! It is now time to drop that whole falsity. What can people take away from you now? Sooner or later you will be dead, and all respect, and all character, and everything, will be gone; soon you will be forgotten. A few people will remember you for a few days, then they will die and even the memory of you will be gone from the earth.
How many millions of people have lived on the earth? Nobody even knows their names now. In their own time they must have bragged about their character, personality, strength, truth, courage, religiousness, saintliness, this and that. Now nobody even knows their names. When a person dies, almost ninety-nine percent of their life disappears; one percent lingers a little bit as memories in the minds of the few people who knew them. Yes, they will remember that person once in a while, but that is all that is left. And then those people will die and even those memories will disappear. Within a few years a person disappears so totally, it is as if he had never been there in the first place.
What have you got to lose now? You have nothing to lose and you have everything to gain. You are fortunate that in the last phase of your life you have come into contact with this energy field. You are fortunate that in the evening of your life a door is opening – and the person who comes back home, even in the evening, should not be thought lost. That is a proverb in India: even in the evening when the sun is setting, if somebody comes back home he is not thought to be lost. He has arrived, finally, he has arrived.
Your life has gone down the drain – now don’t miss this last phase. And the last phase is the most important because it will bring death. If you can die as truth you will not be born again. If you can die with all the falsities dropped, with all false identities renounced, disconnected from you; if you can die utterly naked before God, absolutely naked before God, like a small child before his parents – your death will be the most beautiful experience that you have ever had.
Those who have known death say that life is nothing compared to death. Life has extension, it is spread out over seventy, eighty years. Hence, it cannot have the intensity which death can have, and only death can have because it happens in a split second. You live over eighty years and in a split second you die. Death has intensity, not extension but intensity. It has depth.
Life gives you a long time in which to live; you can postpone things to tomorrow and you can live in a lukewarm way. But death is so total – if you can die consciously. And you can die consciously only if you expose yourself totally, so all that the unconscious is carrying is poured out, all that the unconscious is repressing is released, so the unconscious becomes empty and there is nothing to hide. Then you can totally expose yourself in the moment of death and you can die consciously.
Remember, a person who has any repression cannot die consciously; repression creates the unconscious. The more repressed you are, the bigger an unconscious you have. What actually is the unconscious? – it is that part of your mind that you don’t want to see, it is that part of your mind that you bypass, it is that part of your house where you never go, the basement. You go on throwing all kinds of things into it and you never go in.
The unconscious is not a natural phenomenon. The more civilized man becomes, the bigger the unconscious becomes. Uncivilized people have very small unconscious minds. You will be surprised to know about aboriginals, the very primitive people who still exist in some parts of the world. In India, in some deep forests, in the hills, there are still people who are as primitive as you can find anywhere, they are at least five thousand years behind. One of the most important things about these people – I have lived with them – is that they don’t dream. It is tremendously important. It is very rare that a primitive dreams because he has no unconscious. He lives his life so naturally, so truthfully, he represses nothing. When you don’t repress anything you cannot create dreams.
A dream is the boiling unconscious. The whole day you go on repressing and in the night, when you fall asleep – when the repressor falls asleep – all that is repressed starts surfacing. That’s what your dreaming is. And if your dreams are nightmares that simply means you are really repressing. Your repression is dangerous. You are repressing neurotic things inside your unconscious and the deeper they go, the more damage they do.
I have lived with the primitives. I have noted many things in them, but the most important is that they don’t dream. If you ask them, “What did you dream last night?” they say, “What dream? We slept well.” Yes, once in a while somebody dreams, but only once in a while, and the person who dreams has a totally different kind of dream from you. His dream is not the sort of dream that Freud, Jung and Adler study. His dream is intuitive, his dream is a prediction of the future, his dream is a foreshadowing of something that is going to happen.
So in a primitive society the dreamer becomes the seer; he becomes the shaman. Because he can dream he becomes a tremendously important person. In a civilized society the psychoanalyst becomes very important because he can analyze dreams, he can interpret dreams. In a primitive society the dreamer becomes the most important person. He becomes the religious head of the commune because his dreams become predictions, his dreams always prove to be true. He does not dream about the past because he never represses it. If he dreams at all, he dreams about the future, that which has not yet happened and is going to happen – his dreams are almost always true. And his dreams have to be understood in a totally different way. Modern psychoanalysis is not able to understand his dreams; it is too obsessed with the civilized man, his unconscious. The primitive man has no unconscious.
And the same happens to a buddha: his unconscious disappears because he goes on exposing, pouring out whatsoever is in his being. He never represses it, he never creates an unconscious. The unconscious is a creation of civilization: the more civilized you are, the more unconscious you are. If you become absolutely civilized you will be robots, you will be absolutely unconscious. That’s what is happening. That calamity is happening all over the world – it has to be stopped. And the only way to stop it is to help people to pour out their unconscious in meditations.
Gita, expose yourself. That will unburden you. And I am here. Don’t be worried and don’t be afraid. I am coming with you. I will keep company with you to the point where you don’t need me. I will only leave you in the unknown when I see that you can now walk on your own – and then there will be no fear.
But don’t miss this opportunity. This time, die consciously. You have to start right now to live consciously, only then can you die consciously. If you can live consciously for even a few years, that will be enough. A few months, a few days, or – if the intensity is great – even a few minutes, are enough to live consciously. Then one becomes capable of dying consciously. And to die consciously is to be resurrected into a totally different dimension, the dimension of the divine.
I would like all of my sannyasins to die so deeply that they are never born again, so they can disappear into the cosmos, become part of the whole.

The fourth question:
Osho,
Each morning at discourse I feel you are beckoning me with your eyes to walk across the water to you. Courage arises and I step from my boat. Exhilarated, I take a few steps, but I become afraid and begin to sink. What is this?
I am continuously beckoning you to come across, certainly, but who has told you to walk on the water? Why should you step out of your boat? Use the boat and just come across.

Once, a man went to Ramakrishna, who was sitting on the bank of the Ganges. The man was a very famous yogi of those days. He had gone there to brag about himself – that’s what these so-called yogis go on doing. He said, “Ramakrishna, what are you doing sitting here? Let us go for a walk on the Ganges.”
Ramakrishna asked him, “How many years did it take for you to learn to walk on water?”
The man said, “Eighteen years, practicing in the Himalayas: hard work, fasting, yoga postures. It was difficult, very difficult, almost impossible. Many times I wanted to drop the whole project, but somehow I persisted. Now I have the siddhi, the power – I can walk on water. Can’t you?”
Ramakrishna said, “I am not so foolish. When I want to go to the other bank I give the ferryman only two paise, and that’s enough! Your eighteen years are worth just two paise. Get lost! I am not interested.”

Only fools are interested in miracles.
Another story…

One day Hassan, a Sufi mystic, went to Rabiya, the great Sufi woman. He had just learned how to walk on water, so he told Rabiya, “Let us go and walk on the water and have a little spiritual discourse, a discussion.”
That spiritual discussion was just an excuse; he wanted to show Rabiya that he could walk on water.
Rabiya said, “On the water? That does not appeal to me. Let us go up to the clouds. We will sit on the clouds and have a spiritual discourse.”
Hassan said, “But I don’t know how to go up and sit on the clouds.”
Rabiya said, “Neither do I. But what is the point? Why can’t we have a religious discourse here? Why go to the water, or to the clouds?”

All great mystics have been against miracles, and all fools are interested in miracles.
Use your boat. You have to come to the other shore, certainly, but there is no need to get out of your boat. You have misunderstood my calling you.

A group of tourists were standing at a vantage point overlooking an awesome panorama of the Grand Canyon, when someone could be heard saying, “You know, every afternoon there is a tremendous updraft here caused by warm air rushing up the canyon. A person can actually float on it.”
“You don’t say!” replied his friend.
“Why yes, watch this,” the man said. And he stepped off the edge of the cliff, floated away, and then came back easily.
“Wow!” said someone standing nearby, “I’ll try that!” And he stepped off and went plummeting out of sight down to the bottom of the canyon.
Said the friend, “You can be really mean sometimes, Superman.”

But I cannot be mean to you – please, don’t get out of your boat! Of course you will sink, it is not your fault; that’s how it should be. But use the boat – that’s what is it made for! I am not for any stupid miracles, I am totally for the natural. Use the boat, use all natural means. Godliness is only available through nature, not through the cunning devices of man.
You say, “Osho, each morning at discourse I feel you are beckoning me with your eyes to walk across the water to you. Courage arises and I step from my boat. Exhilarated, I take a few steps, but I become afraid and begin to sink. What is this?”
Stupidity, just pure stupidity. Next time courage arises, don’t do it. Don’t you have oars? Use them, use the boat. There are two kinds of foolish people in the world: one who does not like to use the boat, who would like to walk on the water; and the other who will use the boat, but when they have reached the other shore they will not leave it. Just out of gratitude, they carry the boat on their head all their life.
I go on beckoning you, but you have to understand it rightly. Just a little misunderstanding, just a little misinterpretation, and you will go astray. That’s where I am totally different, and you will see the difference. The same story is there with Jesus: Jesus calls; he is walking on water.
I don’t know that stories like this are true; they must have been invented by priests. Priests are the most cunning, inventive people in the world. I cannot think that a man like Jesus could be so mean as to walk on water. Why would he? These stories have been invented to convert foolish people because only they are interested in such things.
But the story is…

Jesus is walking on the water. Thomas is sitting in the boat and sees him coming. Great enthusiasm arises in him – just like you, great courage – and he thinks, “If the master can do it, why can’t I?” So he asks Jesus, “Can I come and follow you?”
Jesus says, “Certainly, come and follow me.” But Thomas walks only two, three steps before great doubt arises in him and he starts sinking.
Jesus somehow has to save him, and tells him, “Don’t be a doubting Thomas.” Since then there has been the phrase “doubting Thomas.”

If I had been in Jesus’ place, I would not have walked on the water in the first place, and secondly, if by some chance I had walked, I would have stopped Thomas: “Stay in the boat, don’t be too courageous.”
Intelligent people are always courageous, but not vice versa: courageous people are not necessarily intelligent. I would have told Thomas, “Wait! There is no need to walk on the water. Follow me into the dimension of the unknown, but there is no need to walk on the water; that is not a prerequisite for it.” I would have stopped him there and then, rather than allowing him to walk a few steps and sink, and then saving him. I would not have liked all that trouble at all.
So, next time this courage hits you, wait; close your eyes, take your oars, use the boat. Don’t misunderstand me: I would like you to trust, but very intelligently. Trust is the ultimate essence of intelligence; it is not blind faith. I am not against your doubt. You have to use your doubt in purifying your intelligence. You have to use your doubt in sharpening your intelligence. That is the function of doubt – to sharpen intelligence. Once intelligence is sharpened doubt disappears, trust arises. Doubt is not against trust. In fact, doubt is a servant, it serves trust.
So I am not here to tell you to faithfully believe in me – trust intelligently. But people have their own understanding. I say one thing, they understand something else.

Charlie was taking his out-of-town pal for a stroll through the city. The friend saw a good-looking girl and asked Charlie if he knew her.
“Yes, that’s Betty – twenty dollars.”
“How about that one?”
“That’s Dolores – forty dollars.”
“Here comes one that is really first class. Do you know her?”
“That’s Gloria – eighty dollars.”
“My God! Aren’t there any nice, respectable girls in this town?”
“Of course there are, but you couldn’t afford them.”

People have their own way of understanding. It is not much of an understanding, but that’s what they have got, and they go on interpreting through it: “Of course there are, but you could not afford their rates,” he says.

A man was discussing his problems with his next-door neighbor. “That selfish wife of mine,” he was saying, “you know what she has done? She has rationed me, cut me down to a miserable once-a-week!”
“Don’t feel too sorry for yourself,” said the next-door neighbor. “I know at least ten fellows living in our block who she has cut off completely.”

I am saying things which have to be meditated upon. Don’t come to conclusions in a hasty, hurried way, because I am saying things which are really paradoxical. This doubt is a paradox. You have been told down the ages, “Believe, don’t doubt.” I am saying something totally different – doubt, and doubt totally, so that your intelligence is sharpened. And then trust arises of its own accord.
Nobody has ever said this to you, hence the world has remained blind, hence the people have remained just sheep. It has been good: good business for the priests, good business for the politicians, good business for the so-called leaders – because people are at a loss, they need leaders. In worldly matters, in other-worldly matters, they need leaders. In worldly matters the politician becomes their leader, and in other-worldly matters, the priest. And the priest and the politician have been in a conspiracy: “Don’t allow people to become intelligent.” Once they become intelligent they will not need any leader and they will not need any priest. They will learn how to walk on their own.
My approach is totally new: use doubt as a sharpener. I am not against doubt, I am all for it. Doubt very scientifically. And why am I not against doubt? – because I know if you really doubt, it is bound to make your intelligence clearer and clearer. It is bound to give you more and more clarity. Belief confuses, doubt clarifies. And there comes a point when doubt cannot doubt anymore. I trust in truth so much that I can tell you to doubt because I know, if you go on doubting, a moment is bound to come when doubt dies of its own accord. When you see the truth, how can doubt exist? Then trust arises.
Trust is through knowing, not through believing. Don’t believe me. Trust me certainly, but don’t believe me. And if you want to trust me you will have to go on a long pilgrimage of doubt, of sharpening your intelligence. That’s why I go on talking to you, creating a thousand and one doubts in you. I don’t allow you to settle anywhere. You would like to settle very soon because who wants to travel forever and ever? One wants to make a home and settle. I say one thing one day, and just the opposite another day. I create doubt continuously because my trust in truth is so tremendous that I know no doubt can disturb it. If you go on doubting, even doubt will bring you to truth.
All doors bring you to godliness, even the door of doubt. Sincerity is needed and intensity is needed and totality is needed.

The fifth question:
Osho,
In the old days you used to hammer us fiercely. I remember clutching at the tiles of the floor in despair after a lecture when you had once again shouted at us, “You stupid disciples!” Now you come into lectures looking around happily, like a farmer looking at his golden cornfields. Are you happy with us?
I am absolutely happy with you. I am one of the most fortunate masters in the world because a great many intelligent, alive, loving people have gathered around me. The very cream of the modern mind has gathered around me. I am tremendously happy, yes, just like a farmer when he looks out on his golden cornfields.
You are my golden cornfield. The crop is becoming riper and riper every day. Many are blossoming, many are coming to fruit. Many are growing – in love, in awareness, in trust, in every possible way. I am tremendously happy that you are here with me.
It happens very rarely. Jesus was not so fortunate: he had only a few disciples, and they were not very intelligent people either. They were asking really stupid questions, even to the very end.
The night Jesus invited them to say good-bye, to dine and drink with him, and dance with him – because this was the last night, when he would be caught, and the next day he might be killed – do you know what the disciples were asking? One disciple asked, “Lord, now that you are leaving us, please tell us one thing. We know perfectly well that in the Kingdom of God you will be by the right side of God, you will be his right hand. But who among us will be by your side? And what will be our numbers and positions?”
The master is going to die and the disciples are talking politics! “Who will be the first after you, and the second, and the third?” The master is going to die and the disciples are feeling jealous of each other, competitive. They are thinking of the other world in terms of this world. Jesus must have cried deep down in his heart. These are the people on whom he has wasted his life, for whom he was ready to die. Then he was caught, and only one disciple, Peter, stayed and followed him; the others fled. And out of the twelve one, Judas, deceived him; he sold him for thirty silver coins.
When I read that the man who hanged Z. A. Bhutto of Pakistan got twenty-five rupees for hanging him, suddenly I remembered Jesus – he was sold for thirty rupees. The price has fallen; now you get five rupees less. In fact, the price has fallen too much because thirty rupees of pure silver in those days and twenty-five paper notes of today – the difference is not just five rupees, it is much more. Thirty rupees from those days would be equivalent to almost one thousand rupees today.
But what kind of humanity is this? What kind of civilization and what kind of progress are we talking about? Jesus was killed by Jews. The man who hanged Bhutto was a Christian – in a Mohammedan country, they could not find anybody else to hang him. A Christian! How could a Christian do such a thing? And how could he still remain a Christian? He was a professional; that is what his family had been doing for many generations. By a very strange coincidence, this man’s father hanged one of the great Indian martyrs, Sardar Bhagat Singh, a revolutionary – one of the greatest revolutionaries that India has produced in these hundred years.
And in the exact same place where Bhagat Singh was hanged – although now the jail has been demolished – Z. A. Bhutto shot one of his political opponents. That man was the magistrate who ordered the hanging of Bhagat Singh. And now Bhutto is hanged by the son of the man who hanged Bhagat Singh. History goes on spinning, weaving strange patterns in a very mysterious way.
The night Jesus was taken away, a disciple betrayed him for only thirty rupees. For just thirty rupees, one can sell a man like Jesus? And seeing the danger, the remaining ten fled immediately. What kind of disciples were they? Only one remained, and he was not following Jesus but hiding in the crowd; he had only remained out of curiosity. Jesus said, “Escape, because before sunrise, before the cock crows, you will have thrice betrayed me.”
But the man thought in his heart, “No, Judas has betrayed you, the others have fled, but I am made of better stuff. I cannot deny you, I cannot renounce you. I will be true to you to the very last.”
But it happened exactly the way Jesus had said. Before sunrise, this man, Peter, had thrice denied him because the crowd taking Jesus, making him a prisoner, became more and more suspicious of Peter. They were carrying torches, and he looked like a stranger. They asked, “Who are you? Are you a follower of Jesus?”
And he said, “No.”
And when he had said no three times, Jesus looked back and said, “Remember now.” At the time of the crucifixion not a single disciple was there, they had all escaped.
Jesus was not very fortunate. Buddha was far more fortunate. But I am even more fortunate than Buddha because Buddha had only one kind of people around him. My disciples are multidimensional; they come from every nook and corner of the world. This is a universal brotherhood. This is the first time that religion is taking off, becoming airborne, losing local limitations. This is the first time that religion is losing racial associations, national associations – Indian, Chinese, Japanese, German, Hindu, Mohammedan, Christian, Buddhist. We are creating a kind of religiousness without any name; a nameless religion can only be true to a nameless God.
Yes, I am tremendously happy. The moment I look at you my heart dances with immense joy. And this is only the beginning. Many, many more people are going to come, they are on their way. You are just heralding the coming of millions more. Hence, your responsibility is great because you will be preparing the way; the others who will come will learn from you. The others will learn love, awareness, discipline, spontaneity, individuality, freedom – all of these dimensions – from you.
The new commune will have at least ten thousand sannyasins resident, and thousands and thousands will come and go. You are also fortunate because you will be the first bricks: out of you this great temple is going to be created, you will be the foundation. Remember that responsibility, and remember that such a responsibility comes only as a benediction.

The last question:
Osho,
I am suspicious about my father. I don't think that he is my father. Can you help me get rid of this doubt?
Christopher, this is a really difficult question. In the first place, it matters not. It is irrelevant whether A is your father or B is your father. How can it matter? Christopher is Christopher; you are that which you are. From where your first cell came; from where, from what source, makes no difference now.
Sooner or later it will be impossible to decide who is whose father because there are going to be semen banks, just like there are blood banks. People will donate their semen to the banks, and the doctors will decide the right type for a particular woman.
Why are you so worried about it? Such things sometimes become obsessions. Even if you come to know, even if I say that “This man is your father,” then what? For example, if I say Paritosh, old Paritosh, is your father – are you going to believe me? You will start doubting me, so it is better that you doubt your father. Or you may start doubting poor Paritosh, who has nothing to do with it.
Only your mother can answer. Even your father cannot answer because even your father may not be right. Ask your mother.

A youngster went to his father and said, “Dad, I would like to marry Suzy.”
“Don’t marry her, son,” said the old man. “When I was a kid I sowed my wild oats, and well, you know how it is.”
About a week later the boy came to his father again and said, “Dad, I am in love with Mildred and I want to marry her.”
The old salesman said, “She is your half sister, son. You can’t marry her.”
“How about Mabel?” the kid asked a couple of weeks later.
“She’s your half sister too,” said Dad.
The youngster, who was anxious to get married, went to his mom and complained, “Pop says I shouldn’t marry Suzy, Mildred or Mabel because they’re my half sisters. What can I do?”
Mom put her arms around her boy and consoled him: “You can marry any one of them if you like – he’s not your father.”

So it is a very difficult thing. Unless your mother is truthful about it, nobody can give you a guarantee. But I have heard about a machine that IBM has produced. I don’t know whether it is true or not, you can inquire.

A woman, having heard how fantastic IBM machines are, enters the IBM salesroom to look around.
“You can ask the machine any question you like and it will give you the correct answer,” explains the salesman.
The woman writes the question, “Where is my father?” and puts it into the machine. The answer comes back, “Your father is fishing off the west coast of Florida.”
“Ridiculous!” exclaims the woman. “My father has been dead twenty years.”
“The machine never makes a mistake,” the salesman proclaims. “There is simply a misunderstanding. Rephrase your question and ask it again.”
The woman writes down for the machine, “Where is my mother’s husband?”
The IBM machine answers, “He has been dead twenty years, but your father is fishing off the west coast of Florida.”

But please don’t ask such questions of me, I am not an IBM machine – neither am I your mother.
Enough for today.

============================================================

The first question:
Osho,
If you know, can you tell me what is best for me?
Miguel, the best thing is to never be born, but you have already missed that. The second best thing is to die as soon as possible – that’s a little bit difficult. I don’t mean physical death, that is not difficult. To commit suicide is the easiest thing in the world, the most cowardly. It needs no guts. But to commit psychological suicide needs great courage – to be and yet not to be, to drop the ego.
Yes, there are a few people who have managed to do the first. Lao Tzu must have been one of those who were born and yet not born, who came into the world utterly egoless. Hence the story that Lao Tzu lived in his mother’s womb for eighty-two years. He resisted the temptation to come out of the womb until he became ripe, until he became capable of existing in the world without the ego. He allowed himself to be born – permitted himself – only when there was no possibility of any ego arising. What Buddha attained under the bodhi tree, Lao Tzu must have attained in his mother’s womb. Yes, there is a way to be aware even in the mother’s womb. Then a person is born, but born without the ego; Jesus must have come that way.
Some people have managed the second best way: this means to go on dying to the past. The ego is nothing but the cumulative effect of all your yesterdays. If you can die to all your yesterdays, even to the moment that has just passed and is no more, you remain without the ego. You are there in utter radiance, in great splendor, there is no idea of “I.” There is a pure “amness,” just a fragrance of being, with no center – then you exist in godliness and godliness exists in you.
This second way is also very difficult. One needs to be utterly alert, so that the instant a moment passes by, one has slipped out of it. One does not stay lingering in the past, one does not go on clinging to memories. There is no nostalgia, no looking back. It means not looking ahead because looking ahead is another way of looking back. It means not beginning life in the future, projecting life into the future, because the future is nothing but a reflection of the past. What you desire in the future is bound to be nothing but a repetition of the past. Modified, refined, more sophisticated, more polished, but still the same. There cannot be any qualitative difference; maybe there are some quantitative differences. The future is nothing but a projection of the past.
So I am not saying drop the past so that you can live in the future – that is the past coming in again through the back door. If you drop the yesterdays, you will have to drop tomorrow too. When all your yesterdays and all your tomorrows have disappeared, then what is left? – this moment, this purity, this silence. Thisness. Buddha calls it tathata, suchness. There is nothing else to desire, there is no should, no ought, there is nowhere to go. One is utterly contented in this moment; one is relaxed, calm and quiet. All desires have disappeared because they can exist only through the past or through the future. And when there is no desire, how can there be a mind? The mind is desire. And when there is no mind how can there be an ego? Ego is the center of the false mind. This is the second best way.
The third best way is to love because love is a sweet way to die, to disappear. The sweetest way to die is to love. It helps you to drop the ego, and with no effort. It helps you to drop the ego with such grace, with such joy, that if you cannot drop the ego through love then it will be very difficult to drop it at all.
In love, the other is available, the beauty of the other, the caressing warmth of the other, the protection, the shelter; the other is an excuse to drop the ego. It is easy to die because love gives one courage, courage to do the impossible. And love gives one a kind of drunkenness – in that drunkenness it is easy to make the jump, the quantum leap.
Love sends one mad. That madness is higher than what you call sanity because your sanity remains crawling in the dark holes of the earth, and love opens its wings toward the sun. Love dares, is adventurous. Love is ready to die because in love one feels that even if one dies – one cannot die. Love gives a feeling of immortality. And the path of love is full of flowers – the birds are singing, the trees are green and it is very sunny. The third best is the easiest.
But for some people it is very difficult, the very idea of drowning oneself in the other makes them very scared. The very presence of the other makes them shrink inward; the very presence of the other, and they become closed. If you are of that type, Miguel, then the fourth way is to meditate.
This too is a way of dying, a little dryer than the third way, a little more alone, not so sweet certainly, even a little bitter. But likes differ, some people like bitter tastes – coffee, cocoa. And there are people who are intrigued only by a harder course; the easy is not a challenge for them, the easy has no appeal for them. The harder the task, the more they rise to it. They are challenged only by the arduous, the difficult, the impossible; the impossible is their passion – for them is the way of meditation.
So if you like something bitter, spicy, something hard: be alone, doing nothing, sitting silently – the spring comes and the grass grows by itself. In love there is a song, a dialogue, a meeting, a merging, but in meditation one simply evaporates. Slowly, slowly, in aloneness one evaporates, and one day nothing is found, the ego has died.
These are the four possibilities.
Miguel, you ask me, “Can you tell me what is best for me?” These four things. But the basic note is the same, and that is: learn to die because that is the only way to learn to live. Let the ego die and your life starts taking on the flavor of the divine. Death – the death of the ego – becomes the door to the divine.
And the fifth way – which is not really the fifth but a combination of all four ways, a symphony, an orchestra – I call sannyas. It combines all that is beautiful in the four, it is multidimensional. All these four ways are one-dimensional; sannyas is multidimensional. It teaches you how to be born and yet never be born. It teaches you how to die and yet live immensely. It teaches you how to fall in love and yet go on rising up. It teaches you how to disappear in love and yet remain aloof, unpossessed, nonpossessive. It teaches you how to be with the other and yet remain free and let the other be free. It teaches you how to meditate and be alone and yet not let your aloneness become an escape; to be alone and yet be in the world. It teaches you how to be a lotus leaf in the lake; in the water, yet untouched by it. Sannyas is the synthesis of these four dimensions; it is the very crescendo, the cream of them all.
Many religions have concentrated on the first way, particularly the Indian religions; their emphasis is on how not to be born. Hence, in India all the religious people are praying, “God, help us to not be born again. We don’t want to go back into the wheel of life and death.” All Indian religions are basically rooted in this one concept: how to be free from the vicious circle of birth and death, how to go beyond birth and death, how to not be born, how to enter into eternity and never come back into the turmoil of time.
The Christian, the Mohammedan, the Jew: their emphasis is on the second way – to die as soon as possible, to surrender to God. Prayer is their method. Prayer means dying; dying and disappearing as a person, becoming part of the universal; a surrender, a trust in God. Their whole emphasis is on how to surrender their ego, sacrifice their ego, at the altar of the divine.
The third way, to love as a method of dying, has been chosen by all the devotees of the world: the Vaishnavas in India and the Sufis of Islam and the Hasidic mystics of Judaism have all chosen the third. Love: love intensely, love totally, love holding nothing back and you will attain because love kills the ego.
The fourth way, to be aware, to be meditative, has been chosen by Buddhism, Jainism, Zen, Taoism.
My effort here, Miguel, is to create a symphony of all the religions. Here, Sufis and Hasids and the people of Zen and Taoism, are meeting and merging. I am creating an ocean in which rivers from different mountains, bringing different flavors, bringing different fragrances, are meeting and merging; and creating something absolutely new that has never happened before – a universal religiousness. I don’t give it any name.
Miguel, if you are listening to my suggestions, become a sannyasin. And the only way to know what that is, is to be a participant.
Miguel is a journalist from South America. It will be very difficult for him to participate. The whole training of a journalist is to observe, to be a spectator, to watch with a critical eye, and to find whatsoever he can find that is negative. And if he cannot find the negative, then to invent, project, because only the negative becomes news. The positive has no news value, only the negative, only something sensational. People are only interested in the wrong.
If you murder somebody it is news, but if you help somebody, you can go on helping your whole life, it will never become news. If you love it is not news, but if you hate and you destroy, it becomes news. Buddhas don’t really count in the history books.
That’s why it remains a problem whether men like Jesus, Buddha, Krishna, Lao Tzu, ever existed or are just mythology. Nobody is suspicious about Alexander the Great, and Napoleon, and Tamerlane, and Genghis Khan, and Nadir Shah; nobody is suspicious about them. They have left such destructive proof, you cannot deny it. History is full of fools: from Tamerlane to Adolf Hitler they are the major part of history because they create news. History is ancient news. What is in the newspaper today will become history tomorrow, and what is history today was news yesterday.
But somehow the buddhas are left out of the accounts. Why? What is the reason? The reason is that these people were not destructive: they never killed, they never conquered, they never possessed anybody. They lived so silently, so blissfully, they never created a ripple.
Once I was talking to the Prime Minister of India and I asked, “How do you choose your cabinet colleagues? What are the qualifications?”
The Prime Minister said, “Whosoever has nuisance value, whosoever can create more nuisance has to be chosen.” That is the qualification. If he is left out of the cabinet he will create trouble. He has to be taken into the cabinet, he has to be made a minister so he does not create trouble. Troublemakers become powerful, troublemakers become heads of state, troublemakers create news.
Miguel is a journalist. If his training has gone too deep it will be really difficult for him to participate here. But there are a few things you can know only by participation. If you don’t dance you will not know what dance is. You can see somebody else dancing, but it is one thing to see a dancer and it is totally another thing to be a dancer. Seeing a dancer from the outside, you are simply seeing physical gestures. Being a dancer from the inside, you will know the real feel of it.
Somebody can tell you that he has a headache and you can understand that he is in pain. But from the outside – if you have never known a headache – will you be able to understand exactly what his agony is? You will never be able to understand it; it is something interior. You have to participate.
Even suffering cannot be known from the outside – suffering, which is gross. What to say about bliss? What to say about peace, serenity? They are the highest peaks, the Everests of human consciousness. Even dark valleys cannot be known from the outside. You have to go into them, you have to disappear into them.
So if you are really interested, if the question is not just for question’s sake, then be a participant. Fall en rapport with me. Put your mind aside, put your ego aside – that’s what I mean by death. Enter into this buddhafield like a small child, innocent, knowing nothing. Function from a state of not-knowing – that’s what I mean by death. Function from a state of innocence, and the possibilities are tremendous: you also can bloom, as other flowers are blooming in my garden.

The second question:
Osho,
Is God really dead?
Friedrich Nietzsche killed God, and Sigmund Freud buried the corpse. God’s death is no longer new and no longer news either. Now the new idea is that death is God. And that’s what I am teaching you here: forget about God – let us learn death, the art of dying. And if you know how to die you will know what God is.
The old God is certainly dead, and that is good. The old God was getting heavier and heavier on the human heart; the old idea was becoming like a rock, not helping growth, but hindering it. It was very childish, it was created by primitive people, it was their need; it was perfectly suitable for them.
Just go back five thousand years, to the days of the Vedas: it is cloudy, there is thunder and lightning and you are sitting in your cave, with no clothes on of course, shivering, trembling. You will create a kind of God, a God that is born out of fear.
The caveman was constantly in fear: wild animals were roaming all around, no security, no medicine, no protection, no shelter, no light, no fire. Just think of the plight of that man with danger, insecurity, darkness, all around. It was natural for that man to create God as a consolation; it was his illusion. Hence he created a God in the heavens.
If you pray to him he will help you, he will protect you. If you don’t pray, if you don’t obey him, he will punish you. This is a childish concept, perfectly suitable for the people who created it, but it persisted. Times changed, caves disappeared, life became totally different; man was more secure, more sheltered, more safe. How could he keep on carrying that old idea? Sooner or later a man was needed to declare that God was dead.
That’s what Nietzsche did. He did a great service to humanity, he declared something which needed to be declared. He was a courageous man, and he risked much because he was the first man to declare that God is dead. Remember, there were people before him who had said there was no God, but that was totally different. There had been Charvaka in India and Epicurus in Greece, and many more courageous, intelligent people all over the world who denied the existence of God. But to deny the existence of God is one thing, and to declare that God is dead is another. Hence Charvaka never went mad, Epicurus never went mad.
Nietzsche went mad. To say God does not exist is one thing, then there is no question, but to declare that God is dead is another. He was the first man to encounter the fact that the old God had become irrelevant and the new was not on the horizon. The old was gone and the new had not come. And the gap – that gap was maddening, as if somebody has taken the earth from beneath your feet and you are falling into abysmal darkness. You cannot find the bottom anywhere, you go on falling and falling. That’s what happened to Friedrich Nietzsche. He went mad. The day he declared God is dead, the whole edifice that had been used as protection up till then was shattered.
Some people had the idea that “God is” because they felt protected by God. But a few others, who rather than feeling secure in God wanted to be more natural, started feeling afraid of God – because he could punish them. “If you are natural then you will be in hell.” Just to avoid that fear many of those people declared that there was no God. See the point: the person who believes in God and the person who disbelieves in God may not be different. Their psychologies may be exactly the same, they may be two sides of the same coin. One declares that God is, because without God he feels alone, afraid. The other declares there is no God because he feels afraid in the presence of God, afraid of being judged – God is the judge and is there, constantly watching.
Remember, those people who were ascetic, who were ready to deny their nature, were very happy to believe in God. And the people who were more natural, more normal, were happy to believe that there was no God. The reason is the same: the natural person will feel afraid because the natural person will have sex, will have anger, will have jealousy. And God is going to punish him; if God is there, then punishment is certain. It is better for him to say that there is no God; at least for the time being he can relax. And the person who can repress his sex, his jealousies, his anger, would like to declare that God is, because all his investment is in God’s existence. God’s existence is very necessary for his asceticism.
The pathological people declare that God is, and the natural people declare that there is no God. And because there have been very few natural people – society does not allow them to exist – the majority declare God is. But also, the majority only declares “God is” on the surface; deep down they all become hypocrites because to deny nature is not easy, it is a rare feat. Only a few people can deny it; really mad, insane people are needed to deny nature.
Then what is the natural person supposed to do? – he is supposed to become a hypocrite. He should go to the church and the temple, and on the surface, formally, declare that God is, but go on living his natural way. He will become a dual personality.
Nietzsche’s declaration was very original, he was a pioneer. He said, “God is dead” – not that God is not. Up to then, God had been; but now God was no more. Nietzsche took away all the shelter, security, safety; he left man all alone. And naturally, Nietzsche suffered; he himself went mad, he could not tolerate the absence of God. Nietzsche had declared something of immense importance, but it was difficult even for him to absorb it. The truth of it was too much, he was not yet ready.
You ask me, “Is God really dead?” Yes, the old God is dead. The God that used to sit on a golden throne in the seventh heaven is dead. The God you used to believe in during your childhood is dead. The God of your conceptions is dead.

Recently, a new jet plane was invented that goes nine hundred miles an hour. The test pilot was taking it on its maiden flight when he noticed a button he hadn’t used before. He pressed it and the plane zoomed miles upward at a fantastic rate.
He breathed in sharply, and whispered, “Oh, my God.”
And a voice answered, “Yes?”

The God that used to say “Yes” from on high is gone. But it is good that the old God is dead; man needs a new conception, a new perceptivity. God will not be back, godliness will be back. God will not come back as a person again – man has passed that phase, man has come of age. Now we have to think in terms of godliness, not God, of presence not personality.
That’s what happened to Gautam Buddha. H. G. Wells has made a tremendously significant statement about Buddha: that he was the most godless man, and yet the most godly. Godless in the sense that he never believed in any childish conception of God, he never believed in God as a person. But he was the most godly; he believed in the quality of godliness. In that way, now God will not be a father figure, but an experience of love. Now God will be synonymous with love; now God will be synonymous with meditation, awareness. Now God need not be worshipped; God will not be the deity in the temple anymore. God will be your inner consciousness, your inner witnessing, your subjectivity; God will be synonymous with life itself.
Yes, a new God is being born. He has already arrived, but it will take time for humanity to understand it. Nietzsche declared, “God is dead.” I declare, “God is born again,” but with a new face, certainly – Nietzsche would not recognize it. Only a man like Gautam Buddha will be able to recognize it, or a man like Kabir, or a man like Rinzai. Only those who have loved tremendously and meditated tremendously. Only those who have died as egos will be able to understand this new God – not as a person, but as a quality; not as something in particular, which can be pinpointed, but as something diffuse, permeating the whole of existence.
God is the green in the trees, and the red and the gold. God is the song of the bird. God is the white cloud floating in the sky. God is the starry night. God is when two persons meet and hug each other. God is when two lovers melt and merge into each other. God is in all experiences of beauty, joy, celebration. God is in every orgasmic experience.
Now this is a totally different conception of God. You can experience it, but you cannot worship it. You can be it, but you cannot be the worshipper. That’s why my sannyasins are not worshippers. My sannyasins are experiencers. Their God is not something outside, their God is something inside. The inside of things is God. The inside of this whole universe is God.
And if you can experience your own interiority, you will know God is not dead. God cannot be dead. Yes, concepts change because man changes, but God is eternity, God is this totality – how can God be dead? If God is really dead then Nietzsche cannot be alive, then trees cannot bloom anymore, then the earth will not be here, then the sun will not shine, then the stars will simply disappear. Then there will be only darkness and emptiness.
But all is as it has always been. God as an old concept is gone. Prepare the way for the new God to arrive – that’s what sannyas is all about. I am not initiating you into any traditional sannyas, I am not helping you enter any traditional way. I don’t represent the past, I represent the approaching dawn that is very close by. It only needs a little love in your hearts, a little awareness in your beings, and you will become aware.
This time God is going to be born in you. You have to be a little more innocent, more virgin. You have to become the womb. And as man grows, again and again new concepts will be coming. They simply show the growth of man. God is always there, but we grow, our concepts grow, our vision becomes clearer. Naturally, old concepts have to be discarded, thrown out to the junkyard.
All the old Gods are dead – the Hindu Gods and the Mohammedan Gods and the Christian Gods. All the old Gods are dead, and those who are still worshipping in the ancient temples and mosques are simply following a dead routine. God has disappeared from there. Now God needs new people, new mediums to become his vehicles. He needs a totally new human being, a new man.
Become part of this great experiment. My whole experiment is to bring the new God into the world, to help the beyond penetrate the earth. What Nietzsche has done has to be undone.

The third question:
Osho,
I laughed like everyone else when you humorously replied to the question, “If I see you walking along the road, should I kill you?” yet my heart experienced flutters of fear because I perceive fanatics in this town and all over the world who would like to kill you. I see so many angry people who drink the hemlock of hate and scoff at the nectar of love. Are these feelings of fantasy, reality or paranoia?
The feelings that arose in your heart are not of fantasy, are not of paranoia, they are real. There are fanatics, the world is full of them. They would like to kill me. They killed Jesus, they killed Socrates, they killed al-Hillaj Mansoor. Those same fanatics are still here, but there is no need to be afraid of them because in a way, unknowingly, they help the work.
Just think, if Jesus had not been killed, there would have been no Christianity at all. It was the murderers who helped create Christianity. In fact, George Gurdjieff used to say humorously that it was Jesus’ own plan – that he arranged for them to kill him, that he wanted to be killed so that his message would spread. George Gurdjieff used to say that Judas was not Jesus’ enemy, he did not betray him, he simply followed orders. He was the closest disciple, and the most intelligent of all Jesus’ disciples, the most educated, the most sophisticated. Gurdjieff used to say that Jesus ordered Judas: “If you really love me and if your surrender is total, then go now and hand me over to my enemies.”
This is a beautiful story that Gurdjieff invented; it has some truth in it. The truth is that the people who murdered Jesus played into his hands. He may not have planned it, but it worked out perfectly well in his favor.
Just think, there have been many Sufi mystics of the same caliber as Mansoor, but the world knows only Mansoor’s name, nobody else’s. Bahauddin is not known so much, Junnaid is not known so much, Hassan is not known so much, Junnun is not known so much. And they were of the same stature and the same quality, the same enlightenment; but Mansoor has become the greatest name. Without Mansoor there would be no Sufism at all. Mansoor has become the central focus for a simple reason: he was killed.
There were many great philosophers of the same caliber as Socrates, but because he was poisoned his name cannot be effaced. As long as humanity exists, as long as there is some intelligence available somewhere, he will be remembered. Looking back now it does not seem a bad thing, retrospectively, that he was poisoned and killed. He was going to die anyway, he was an old man; he could have lived one more year, two years, four years at the most.
The court told Socrates, “You can save your life if you leave Athens. We will leave you free, but you will not be entitled to enter Athens again.”
Socrates said, “No, I will not compromise just for the sake of my life. I am going to die sooner or later, so why compromise for something which is going to happen anyway? What difference does it make? It is better to be killed, than for it to be known later on that I compromised, that I was a coward.”
The court made another proposal, “We can give you one more option. The pressure is such, we may have to kill you, but we would like to help you in every possible way. If you insist on living in Athens, you can live in Athens, but then stop talking about truth.”
Socrates said, “That is impossible, that’s my business. If I live, I will talk about truth. To me, life and spreading truth are synonymous. What is the point of living if I cannot even talk about truth? If I cannot commune with people, if I cannot initiate people into the world of truth, what is the point of living at all? Please kill me and be finished with the whole thing. I am not going to compromise.”
And he did well. If he had compromised nobody would ever have heard of him. It would have been more calculating to compromise. He could have saved himself, but he was ready to die. He chose death. Why? Because in a very mysterious way death becomes a seal of approval. So don’t be worried about those fanatics. If they kill me they will be helping my work.
Death is bound to come one day, and the best way is not to die in bed; almost ninety-nine percent of people do that. And people like me have been known to find better ways of dying.

A Zen master was dying. Thousands of disciples had gathered; he was a great master. In his last moments he opened his eyes and asked his disciples, “Can somebody suggest how to die? Because people go on just dying in bed. I would like to try something new.”
The disciples were shocked. What kind of question was that? Who had ever heard of someone asking how to die? People don’t even ask how to live. People go on living without asking how to live, and here is a man who cannot even die without asking how to die. He wants to make it a celebration, something a little special.
Seeing that the disciples were silent, he himself suggested, “Have you ever heard of anybody dying buddhalike, in a sitting posture, in padmasana?”
A disciple said, “Yes, I know of a Zen master who died sitting in the lotus posture.”
The old master said, “That won’t do. If somebody has already done it, it is not worth repeating. Have you heard of anybody dying standing up, like Mahavira?”
Mahavira used to meditate while standing. That is unique, very unique; ordinarily, people don’t meditate standing. That’s why in India you will find thousands of Mahavira’s statues standing. You will never find a single statue of Buddha standing, he is always sitting. The sitting posture had always been used for meditation, but Mahavira was his own type of person.
Someone said, “Yes, we have heard – we have not seen but we have heard – that in ancient times one Zen master died standing up.”
The old man said, “Then that won’t do either. Find something soon because death is close by.”
“Have you ever heard,” he then asked, “of somebody dying standing on his head?”
Now nobody had ever heard, nobody had ever even dreamed, of anybody dying standing on his head – in shirshasan, a headstand. They said, “No, we have not heard of it, we have not even thought of it.”
The old man said, “Then that’s perfectly right” – and he stood on his head.
It was a problem now to decide whether he had died or not. And the disciples were afraid to disturb him now that he was standing on his head. They tried: “His breathing seems to have almost disappeared. But how can a man go on standing on his head if he is dead? He will fall. What do we do now? There is no precedent.” Normally, you know what to do when a man dies, what has to be done. But nobody had ever heard of anybody dying standing on his head: “Now what has to be done?”
Somebody remembered that he had a sister who was a nun; she was older than him and lived in a monastery close by. So they ran and asked the old nun what to do. She said, “I am coming. That old fool, is this any way to die? – I will teach him a lesson. I tell you, he has always been a nuisance, even when he was alive he was doing eccentric things.”
She was not worried about death. She came and shouted at the old man, “This is not right! Doing such a stupid thing, and creating trouble for your disciples. Is it right for you? Get up and be normal!”
So the old man laughed, got up, lay down on his bed and said, “Okay, I will die in a normal way then” – and died.

Don’t take death too seriously. Nothing is serious, neither life nor death because nothing matters in the ultimate sense. Life and death are just episodes in the eternity of time, just soap bubbles – life and death both.
I can understand your apprehension, your love for me, but don’t be worried. Neither life nor death have any significance. The only thing that is significant is: if while I am here I can impart some truth to you, if I can impart something that I have seen, if I can impart my perspective to you; if I can help you to see a little bit of reality through my eyes, if I can help you just a few steps into the unknown, then you will be able to go on on your own. Everything else is irrelevant.
And remember, if your love for me is immense, even if I am gone I will go on helping you. These connections are not disconnected by death. Death simply makes no difference for lovers. Death does not exist for lovers. If you have trust, if you have love for me, death doesn’t mean anything at all; we will go on communing the same way. Everything will be the same, nothing will change at all.

The fourth question:
Osho,
Are children really as intelligent as you say they are, before society starts destroying them?
A child is pure intelligence because a child is as yet uncontaminated. A child is a clean slate, nothing is written on him. A child is absolute emptiness, a tabula rasa.
Society starts writing on you immediately that you are a Christian, Catholic, Hindu, Mohammedan, Communist. Society immediately starts writing the Bhagavadgita, Koran, Bible. Society cannot wait, it is very much afraid that if the child’s intelligence is left intact, he will never be a slave; he will never be a part of any slavery, of any structure of domination; he will neither dominate nor be dominated; he will neither possess nor be possessed – he will be pure rebellion.
His innocence has to be corrupted immediately. His wings have to be cut. He has to be given crutches to lean upon so that he never learns to walk on his own two feet, so he always remains in a kind of dependence.
First, the children are dependent on the parents, and the parents enjoy it very much; whenever children are dependent, the parents feel very good. Their life starts to have some meaning: they know they are helping some new people to grow up, some beautiful people to grow up – they are not meaningless. They have the vicarious enjoyment of being creative; it is not true creativity, but at least they can say they are doing something, that they are occupied. They can forget their own problems in the anxiety of bringing up the children. And the more the children are dependent on them, the happier they feel. Although they go on saying they would like their children to be independent, that is only on the surface. A really independent child hurts the parents; they don’t like it because an independent child has no need of them.
That is one of the big problems the older generation is facing today: the new children are not dependent on them. And because they are not dependent you cannot force things upon them, you cannot tell them what to do and what not to do. You cannot be their masters. The old generation is really suffering. For the first time in human history the old generation is feeling utterly empty, meaningless because their whole occupation has gone, and their joy in bringing up children is shattered. In fact they are feeling guilty, afraid, that they may be destroying their children. Who knows, whatsoever they are doing may not be the right thing.
Parents destroy the intelligence of children because that is the only way to enslave them; then the teachers, school, college, university – nobody wants a rebel, and intelligence is rebellion. Nobody wants to be questioned, nobody wants his authority questioned; and intelligence is questioning, intelligence is pure doubt. Yes, one day trust arises out of this pure doubt, but not against doubt – it arises only through doubt.
Trust comes out of doubt like a child comes out of the mother’s womb. Doubt is the mother of trust. Real trust comes only through doubting, questioning, inquiring. And false trust, which we know as belief, comes by killing the doubt, by destroying questioning, by destroying all quest, inquiry, search, by giving people ready-made truths.
The politician is not interested in children’s intelligence because leaders are only leaders when people are stupid. Just think, if this country were intelligent, can you believe that a man like Morarji Desai would be Prime Minister? It would be impossible. It is ridiculous. But people are so stupid they get stupid leaders. People are so unintelligent that are ready to fall into the trap of anybody who pretends lead them.
Children are born with pure intelligence and we are not yet able to respect it. Children are the most exploited class in the world, more than women even. Sooner or later, after women’s lib there is going to be children’s lib – it is far more necessary. Man has enslaved woman, and both man and woman have enslaved the children. And because the child is very helpless, naturally he has to depend on them. It is very mean of them to exploit the child’s helplessness. And hitherto parents have been mean, although I am not saying that they have been so deliberately or consciously, but almost unconsciously, not knowing what they were doing. That’s why the world is in such misery, the world is in such a mess. Unconsciously, unknowingly, each generation goes on destroying the next generation. This is the first generation which is trying to escape the trap; this is the beginning of a totally new history.
But certainly, children are utterly intelligent. Just watch children, look into their eyes, look at the way they respond.

Little Papo, at the zoo with his father, seemed to be enjoying himself thoroughly. As they were looking at the lions however, a troubled look came over the boy’s face. His father asked him what the matter was.
“I was just wondering Daddy. If a lion breaks loose and eats you, what number bus do I take home?”

Just watch children, be more observant…

A teacher asked her class of small children to draw with crayons a picture of whichever Old Testament story they liked best.
One small boy drew a man driving an old car. In the back seat were two passengers, both scantily dressed.
“It is a nice picture,” said the teacher, “but what story does it tell?”
The young artist seemed surprised at the question. “Well!” he exclaimed, “doesn’t it say in the Bible that God drove Adam and Eve out of the Garden of Eden?”

No proof is needed. Just look around, children are everywhere, just watch.
Another story I have heard…

In another school the teacher asked the children to do the same, to draw a picture of any Bible story that they liked. And instead of a car, one child drew an airplane. The airplane had four windows. From one window God the Father was looking out, from another, the Holy Ghost, and from the third, Jesus Christ. But the teacher was puzzled, “These three I can understand, but who is the fourth?”
And the child said, “Pontius the Pilot.”

But nobody watches children. In fact, everybody thinks they are just a nuisance. They should not be heard, they should only be seen; has been the dictum down the ages. Who cares what they ask? Who cares what they say? Who listens?

A child came running home, panting and breathing hard, and said to his mother, “Listen to what happened! A tiger chased me from school all the way up to the house. Somehow I managed to get away. I had to run so hard.”
The mother said, “Listen, I have told you millions of times not to exaggerate – millions of times. And there you go again. You found a tiger in the street? Where is it?”
The child said, “Look out of the window, it’s standing there.”
The mother looked: a small dog!
She said, “That is a tiger? You know perfectly well that’s a dog. Go upstairs and pray to God, ask for forgiveness!”
So the child went upstairs. After a few minutes he came back down. The mother said, “You prayed? You asked God for forgiveness?”
The child said, “Yes. I said, ‘God forgive me. It was totally wrong of me to think of that little dog as a tiger.’ And God said, ‘Don’t be worried. When I first saw it, I thought it was a tiger too.’”

Children have immense intelligence, but down the ages they have not been allowed to use it. We have to create a new kind of education where nothing is imposed on the children, where they are helped to strengthen their natural, God-given intelligence. They should not be stuffed with information which is in fact almost useless. Ninety-eight percent of the information that we are throwing into our children’s minds is just stupid, foolish. Because of that load, that baggage, the children will never be free of the burden. I have been a university professor, and I have been a student from primary school to university. My own observation is that ninety-eight percent of the information is not needed at all; to go on throwing it at children is utterly futile. And not only is it futile, it is harmful, positively harmful.
Children should be helped to be more inventive; not more repetitive, which is how our education is geared right now. Our whole educational system is based on repetition. If a child can repeat things better than others then he is thought to be more intelligent. In fact he only has a better memory, not better intelligence. It almost always happens that a man with a very good memory is not very intelligent, and vice versa.
Albert Einstein didn’t have a very good memory. Newton, Edison, and so many more great inventors were really very forgetful. Once it happened that Edison even forgot his own name. Now that should be the last thing you forget. Can you imagine forgetting your own name? Even asleep you don’t forget it. If all three thousand of you go to sleep and I suddenly come and call “Rama,” nobody else will hear it, but Rama will say, “Don’t disturb me. Let me sleep. Somehow I have managed to sleep a little bit, fighting with the mosquitoes, but now you are here, calling me.” Nobody else will hear it, but Rama, even in his sleep, knows that is his name.

Edison once forgot his own name. He was standing in a queue during the First World War; he had gone to get his rations. When Edison’s number came up, the man on the counter looked here and there, and asked, “Where is Thomas Alva Edison?”
Somebody in the queue said to Edison, “If I’m not mistaken, you are Thomas Alva Edison.”
Edison said, “You must be right. I suspected it too. The name seemed familiar, but I was thinking maybe it’s a friend’s name, or some other name I’m familiar with.”

Our whole education system is built around memory, not intelligence: stuff more and more information into the memory, and make the man into a machine. Our universities are factories where men are reduced to machines. Twenty-five years are wasted – one-third of your life – in making you into a machine. And then it becomes really difficult to unwind you, to make you a man again.
That is my trouble, and my work here. You come as machines, very uptight, full of memories, information, knowledgeability; absolutely in the head, hung up in there. You have lost all contact with your heart and your being. To pull you down toward the heart, and then toward the being, is a really difficult task.
But in a better world this will not be needed. Education should help people to become more and more intelligent, not more and more repetitive. Right now education is repetition: you cram in whatsoever nonsense is told to you, and then you vomit it out on the examination papers – and the better you vomit the more marks you get. There is only one thing you have to remember: be repetitive, repeat exactly. Don’t add anything, don’t delete anything, don’t be inventive, don’t be original.
Originality is killed, repetitiveness praised. And intelligence can only grow in an atmosphere where originality is praised. The goal should not be efficiency, but originality.

One morning, Johnny came late to his school in the farming district.
“Johnny, why are you late today?” the teacher asked.
“I had to bring the bull out to the cow this morning, teacher.”
“That’s no excuse,” said the teacher. “Couldn’t your father do that?”
“No teacher,” said Johnny. “You’ve got to have the bull.”

Meditate over it – you missed it.

The last question:
Osho,
Why should there be a press office in the ashram?
Why not?
I am an ancient Jew, you know – I answer a question with another question, it is an ancient Jewish habit.

Once Adolf Hitler asked a rabbi, “I don’t understand. Whenever anything is asked of you Jews, why do you always answer with another question?”
And the rabbi said, “Why not?”

I am a modern man; in fact I’m a little ahead of my time. I am going to use every possible means to spread the truth: newspapers, video, tape recorders, films, radio, television, satellite transmission – everything.
Buddha had to go to every village. You didn’t ask him, “Why do you go on walking from one village to another?” That was the primitive way of spreading the message. For forty-two years he was traveling and traveling. But to do that now would be foolish.
I can be in my room and I can fill the whole earth with my message. Now it would be very unintelligent to go walking from one village to another; Buddha was helpless. If I had been there in Buddha’s time I would have done the same as him. If Buddha were here now he would do the same as me.
The Press Office creates a question in many people’s minds – they think truth need not be declared. It needs to be declared. Jesus said to his disciples, “Go in every direction and shout from the housetops. Only then will people hear because people are deaf.”
I will not tell you to go and shout from every housetop. Better means are available, man has invented great technology. Everybody else is using that technology, but when it is used for truth, questions start arising. If you use it for business, good; if you use it for politics, good; if you use it for evil, perfectly all right. But if you use it for God, then questions start arising. I am going to use all kinds of media.

A new, and rather young, lady teacher had joined the school. One day she found written on the blackboard the words: “Johnny Jones is a passionate bastard. He can kiss and cuddle better than any other boy in the class.”
“Who wrote this?” she demanded. After a while, she discovered that Johnny Jones had written it himself.
“Right,” she said, “you can stay behind after class.”
When he eventually reappeared, several of the other boys clustered round him and asked, “What happened, Johnny? Did she cane you?”
“Oh no, nothing like that,” replied Johnny, who was rather a big boy for his age. “But it pays to advertise.”

It always pays to advertise, and that is not a new thing either. Krishna Prem has been with Moses as well. He is an ancient pilgrim, he is not here with me for the first time.

Moses, standing on the shores of the Red Sea with his press agent, announces, “I am now going to raise my hand and the sea will part so my people can walk across safely. Then I will lower my hand and the sea will come together again.”
Elated, Krishna Prem, his press agent, screams, “Baby, you pull that one off and I’ll get you two full pages in the Old Testament!”

Enough for today.

============================================================

My inside, listen to me, the greatest spirit, the teacher, is near,
wake up, wake up!

Run to his feet –
he is standing close to your head right now.

You have slept for millions and millions of years.

Why not wake up this morning?

There is a flag no one sees blowing in the sky-temple.
A blue cloth has been stretched up,
it is decorated with the moon and many jewels.

The sun and the moon can be seen in that place;
when looking at that, bring your mind down to silence.

I will tell you the truth:
the man who has drunk from that liquid wanders around like someone insane.
A poem from J. Krishnamurti:
I have no name,
I am as the fresh breeze of the mountains.
I have no shelter;
I am as the wandering waters.
I have no sanctuary, like the dark gods;
Nor am I in the shadow of deep temples.
I have no sacred books;
Nor am I well-seasoned in tradition.
I am not in the incense
Mounting on the high altars,
Nor in the pomp of ceremonies.
I am neither in the graven image,
Nor in the rich chant of a melodious voice.
I am not bound by theories,
Nor corrupted by beliefs.
I am not held in the bondage of religions,
Nor in the pious agony of their priests.
I am not entrapped by philosophies,
Nor held in the power of their sects.
I am neither low nor high,
I am the worshipper and the worshipped.
I am free.
My song is the song of the river
Calling for the open seas,
Wandering, wandering,
I am Life.
I have no name;
I am as the fresh breeze of the mountains.
Truth has no name, and truth is not confined to any system of thought. Truth is not a theory, a theology, a philosophy. Truth is the experience of that which is.
Truth is not intellectual or emotional. Truth is existential. These are the three layers of human consciousness.
The first is the intellectual: it theorizes, it spins and weaves beautiful words, but with no meaning at all. It is very cunning, very deceptive. It can make you believe in words as if they have some substance. It talks about God, truth, freedom, love, meditation, but it only talks; it is just words and words and words. Those words are empty shells; if you look deep down into them they are hollow.
This part of human consciousness goes on decorating; it uses jargon, to hide its inner emptiness. And our whole education – social, religious, cultural – consists only of words; it only cultivates the intellectual part of our being, which is the most superficial. Through the intellect you cannot reach the divine, through the intellect you will be lost in a jungle of words; that’s how millions of people are lost. Between you and the divine the greatest barrier is your so-called intellect. Remember, your intellect is not intelligence. Intelligence is a totally different matter.
Intellect is a pseudo coin; it pretends to be intelligence but it is not. And because you don’t know the real you are easily deceived by the unreal, by the pseudo. Beware of the intellectual layer of your being, it is the most developed; that is the danger. The most superficial is the most cultivated. The most superficial is the most nourished. From school to university the superficial is being nourished, strengthened. And slowly, slowly, you get caught up in it, you become trapped. Then people think about love – they only think, they don’t feel.
Krishnamurti relates an incident which happened when he was traveling in a car. The car accidentally knocked down a poor animal, but the two people in the car did not notice what had happened because they were engrossed in a conversation on how to be aware. This is the situation of the majority of humanity.
God is present everywhere. Wherever you turn, he is. Open your eyes, he is, close your eyes and he is – because nothing else exists. God means isness.
Anything that participates in existence is divine. But you don’t see. You go on talking about God, discussing. You have become so clever at hair-splitting, at logic-chopping; you can repeat like parrots the Vedas, the Koran, the Bible; you have become so full of rubbish – which you call knowledge. You have to be aware of this dangerous layer that surrounds you like a hard shell.
Krishnamurti is right when he says:
I have no name…
The word God is not God, and the word love is not love either. If you become too engrossed in the word God you will go on missing godliness forever. If you become too intrigued by the word love then you will go to the library, you will consult all the books – and there are millions written about love by people who don’t know anything about it – and you will collect great amounts of information about love. But to know about love is not to know love. Knowing love is a totally different dimension.
Knowledge about love is very simple; you can become a walking encyclopedia. You can know all the theories of love without ever testing any theory by experience, without ever living a single moment of love, without tasting what love is.
…I am as the fresh breeze of the mountains.
God is neither old nor new – or God is both the most ancient and as fresh as the dewdrops in the early morning sun. Because only God is. God is nontemporal; it does not belong to the dimension of time. Hence you cannot call it old or new – it is fresh, virgin. You need not go into the scriptures. But you certainly have to go into the breeze that is passing through the pine trees, you certainly have to go into the fragrance that is being released by the flowers. Now! You have to go into this moment with your total being, you have to relax herenow, and all the scriptures will be revealed to you. The Vedas and the Gitas and the Korans will be sung in the deepest core of your being. Then you will know that all the scriptures are true. But first your own inner scripture has to be known, understood.
I have no shelter;
I am as the wandering waters.
God is life. Hence God is movement, hence God is in constant change. That is the paradox of existence – it is something that never changes and yet constantly changes. At the innermost core everything remains the same, but on the circumference nothing is ever the same. God is change and no-change. God is eternity and flux.
If you look at the world, you look at the manifest God, which is in constant change – it is like a river moving and moving – but if you look at the unmanifest, then God is always the same. God is both. This world is not separate from God. You need not go in search of him anywhere else; he is hidden here, he is playing hide-and-seek here.
I have no sanctuary; like the dark gods;
Nor am I in the shadow of deep temples.
I have no sacred books;
Nor am I well-seasoned in tradition.
Religion has nothing to do with tradition or sacred books, religion has something to do with existential experience. Your first layer is intellectual – that has nothing to do with religion. You have to bypass it, you have to jump out of it.
Your second layer is emotional, the layer of feeling, where intuitions arise, visions are revealed, dreams of the unknown descend; where poetry is born, and dance, and song. It is closer to God. The intellectual layer is perfectly good for the mundane world, for the marketplace. It is calculation, mathematics; it can become science, technology. It has its uses – use it, but don’t be used by it. The second layer is closer to God, it is the layer of feeling.
The first layer is masculine, the second layer is feminine. The first layer is aggressive, the second layer is receptive. The first layer believes in action, the second layer is a tremendous passivity. It is like a womb. It is an open door, it is a deep welcome. The first goes in search of truth in a very aggressive way; it thinks in terms of conquering.
Even a man like Bertrand Russell writes about “the conquest of nature.” Bertrand Russell remained confined to the first layer. He had the intrinsic capacity to go far deeper into reality, but he remained concerned with words, logic, mathematics. He thought in terms of conquering nature: how the part could conquer the whole, how the drop could conquer the ocean, how the leaf could conquer the tree. It is utter nonsense. The very idea of conquest is ugly, but that’s how the male part of your being thinks. It is aggressive, it is violent, it is destructive, it is coercive, it is possessive, it is imperialistic.
The second layer is intuitive, of feeling, dreaming. The second layer is poetic, aesthetic, of deep sensitivity. It is totally different, its approach is different – it does not analyze. The first part believes in analysis, the second part synthesizes.
Sigmund Freud remained with the first part, Assagioli moved to the second. Hence Sigmund Freud could create psychoanalysis, but Assagioli could introduce the totally new concept of psychosynthesis. Obviously Sigmund Freud looks more scientific, more logical, rational. Assagioli looks like a visionary, a poet, but he goes deeper. Poetry always goes deeper than prose. Singing always goes deeper than syllogism.
Become aware of the second layer in you, help it to revive. Society has repressed it, society does not want it to function. Society is afraid of the second layer because it is irrational, uncontrollable, unpredictable; because the second layer cannot be reduced to mechanical manipulations. The first layer is easily available for the politician, the priest to dominate; it is easily available for the educator, the pedagogue to condition, to hypnotize. The second is not available. The second is so deep that the hands of the priest and the politician and the pedagogue cannot reach it. You have to help your second layer to become more prominent. The emphasis has to shift from the first to the second. And the second is not the last, the second is only the door. The third is the last. The third layer is that of being.
The first layer is intellectual, the second is emotional, the third is existential. With the first you think, with the second you feel, with the third you are. With the third, thinking disappears, feeling disappears. Only a kind of witnessing remains, a pure consciousness, an awareness. That’s what meditation is all about.
All sacred scriptures are in the head; and all your rituals, religions, are in the head. Your rituals, your religions, your theologies don’t even reach the second layer. If you want to reach the second you will have to learn from the painters and the poets, and the singers, musicians, dancers. You will have to go into the world of art. But if you want to go to the third layer you will have to go into deep communion with a master – and without going to the third you will never know what God is.
Only a mystic can make you attuned with your own innermost being. Only one who is in at-onement with his own being can infect you. Religion is something like a contagious disease. It is not a disease, it is health, ultimate health, but health can become as contagious as any illness.
Religion has to be learned in the vicinity of a master. It cannot be learned from traditions, from scriptures. You need somebody alive so that you can be in love, somebody alive whose presence can trigger a process in your being. It cannot be taught, it can only be caught.
I am not in the incense
Mounting on high altars,
Nor in the pomp of ceremonies.
I am neither in the graven image,
Nor in the rich chant of a melodious voice.
I am not bound by theories,
Nor corrupted by beliefs.
I am not held in the bondage of religions,
Nor in the pious agony of their priests.
I am not entrapped by philosophies,
Nor held in the power of their sects.
I am neither low nor high,
I am the worshipper and the worshipped.
This statement is of tremendous value: “I am the worshipper and the worshipped.” You are the seeker and the sought, you are the devotee and the deity, you are the temple and the master of the temple. You need not go anywhere. If you need to go anywhere it is only inward, into your own interiority.
I am neither low nor high,
I am the worshipper and the worshipped.
I am free.
My song is the song of the river
Calling for the open seas,
Wandering, wandering,
I am Life.
These words will help as an introduction, to understand Kabir.
Kabir says:
My inside, listen to me, the greatest spirit, the teacher, is near,
wake up, wake up!
The original is:
Parmatma guru nikat viraje,
jag jag man mere…
Your real master, your God, is very close by. You need not go to the Kaaba or to Kashi in search of him. He is so close that even to say that he is close by is not right because closeness means a little distance. He is exactly you. God asleep – that’s what you are. If you awake, you need not go anywhere else.
The difference between you and a buddha is not the difference of any physical distance, is not the difference of any quantitative change. The difference is of only one thing, otherwise you are exactly the same: you are asleep, he is awake. Open your eyes and you are a buddha, be awake and you are a buddha.
Paramatma guru nikat viraje… For whom are you searching? He is just within you and he is the real master. The outer master only functions as a mirror; he simply shows you who you are. He does not impose anything upon you, he only reflects.
The pseudo-master imposes things upon you. He teaches you this and that, he conditions you, makes you a Hindu or a Mohammedan or a Christian; creates great greed in you for the other world, for heavenly pleasures, makes you afraid of hell. He uses a very psychological strategy.
That’s what the most materialistic school of psychologists – Watson, Skinner, Pavlov – goes on teaching. The behaviorists’ whole teaching is that man can be conditioned by only two things, fear of punishment and greed for reward; punishment and reward. That’s how they work with rats, and when they succeed in conditioning a rat they think the same can be done to a man. They don’t give you any more respect than they give to the rats. And in a way they are right; for about ninety-nine percent of you they are right. They are not right only when a person is awake; they are not right about a buddha. Otherwise humanity functions almost like rats, there is not much difference. The rats function through punishment and reward, and that’s how man functions.
The false master simply makes you afraid of hell, greedy for heaven, and through this strategy he exploits you. The real master does not make you afraid and does not make you greedy either. What is the function of a real master then?
The function of a real master is to be a pure mirror so that you can see your own face, so you can recognize your own face. Once you have seen your own heart throbbing in the mirror, your own heart being reflected, you will become aware of the inner master.
The function of the outer master is to make you aware of the inner master. Once that is done then the outer mirror is no longer needed. You may remain grateful to it because it helped you, you may remain thankful to it forever and ever, but it is no longer needed. The real master works hard so that he is no longer needed. His success simply makes him unneeded.
The false master works in such a way that he is always needed, that without him you cannot move a single inch. He makes you dependent on him. He does not give you awareness – eyes to see, to function – he gives you ready-made formulas. And of course life goes on changing, and those formulas go out of date every day.
I have heard…

A rich man was suspicious of his secretary and asked if she was fooling around. She was not only adamant that she wasn’t, she became stubborn and very angry, saying “I’m a virgin!”
The man said, “Then produce a doctor’s certificate.”
She managed somehow to get a certificate that she was a virgin – she bribed a doctor – and brought the certificate to her boss. He looked at it, then looked at the secretary and said, “But it’s dated yesterday…”

Twenty-four hours had passed. Who knows? One can lose one’s virginity within seconds.
And that’s how it happens in your life: whenever fixed, ready-made answers are given to you they are dated, they are always lagging behind. If you ask me how to behave in a certain situation and I give you a particular answer, you will always be in trouble and dependent on me; because the same situation is never going to happen again – never exactly – and the answer is never going to fit any particular situation. You will always be a misfit. Your whole life will become a great misery of trying to fit square pegs into round holes. Your whole life will be a long, long story of frustration; you will worry why your life is not working.
You can see that nothing seems to be working for Hindus, Mohammedans, Christians, Jainas, Buddhists – their lives are proof of it. What more proof is needed? What Mahavira said is now twenty-five centuries old, how can it fit in this world? But people are still trying, they don’t take note that twenty-five centuries have passed.
Mahavira said not to eat at night. He said it so that insects – mosquitoes and anything else – were not eaten: people used to eat in the dark. They still do in India; in villages, they eat in the dark. The people are so poor that they cannot afford even a kerosene lamp. Mahavira was not aware that one day there would be electricity, how could he have been? Now, there is no problem at all, but still the Jaina goes on insisting that he cannot eat at night.
Once I was staying at the home of a very religious Jaina in Kolkata, a very rich man, and a very beautiful man too. He had a completely soundproofed, centrally air-conditioned palace, but he would not eat at night. I said, “Why? No mosquito can enter, no insects can enter. Why not?” – just because Mahavira said so. This is what happens when people become too obsessed with principles.
The real master never gives you principles, he only gives you insights. He gives you understanding, not commandments. He simply makes you more aware, so that whatsoever the situation is, you can always respond to it on your own; you need not follow a certain fixed principle. He makes you more fluid, more flexible because life goes on changing and if you are very, very inflexible you will suffer.
Parmatma guru nikat viraje, jag jag man mere… Kabir says, the only thing worth doing is to wake up my mind. God, the real guru, is inside.
The word guru is untranslatable. Neither the word teacher nor the word master has its beauty. In fact, the phenomenon of the guru is so deeply Indian that no other language, of any country, is capable of translating it. It is something intrinsically Eastern. The word guru is made of two words, gu and ru. Gu means darkness, ru means one who dispels it. Guru literally means “the light.” And yes, you have the light within you!
If you come across a Buddha or a Jesus or a Krishna or a Mahavira, it will be of tremendous help to you in finding your inner guru. Because seeing Buddha, suddenly a great enthusiasm and hope will arise in you: “If it can happen to Buddha” – who is just like you, the same body, the same blood, bone, marrow – “if it can happen to this man, why not to me?” That hope is the beginning. Meeting with the master on the outside is the beginning of a great hope, a great aspiration.
And this can happen only if you meet a living master. It cannot happen just by reading about Buddha because who knows whether this man was real or not? And the story is being told in such a way that nobody can believe he was historical. Followers are always creating more and more unnecessary stories about their masters. Maybe they do it with good intentions, but even the good intentions of unconscious people are of no use; they are harmful. Maybe the followers want to impress people so they become more attracted, but what really happens is just the opposite.
The Buddhist story is that when Buddha was born his mother was standing, walking in a garden. Buddha was born while his mother was walking. Not only that, the first thing he did was walk seven steps himself. The first thing the child did – walk seven steps. And not just that, the second thing he did was declare, looking at the sky after the seventh step, “I am the awakened one, I am the great Buddha. Nobody has ever been like me and nobody will ever be like me.”
Now, these stupid stories naturally make intelligent people suspicious. One thing is absolutely certain: Buddha is not like us – so maybe, perhaps, he became enlightened, but he gives no hope to us. Jesus was born of a virgin mother – nonsense, patent nonsense. But how can you become enlightened? – you were not born of a virgin mother. Krishna was born as God, he is an incarnation of God – you are not an incarnation of God. These stories, rather than creating hope in you, create a kind of hopelessness.
You need living masters who have not yet become myths. You need living masters who are just like you and yet different, just like you but with something plus, something mysterious surrounding them; in every other way the same as you, but different in one respect: they have a certain understanding which is missing in you, they have a certain luminosity which is missing in you, they have a certain grace, a certain climate which is missing in you. In every other way they are exactly like you: they fall ill, they need food, they become thirsty, they are tired, they have to go to sleep; they are exactly like you in every possible way. Then great hope arises: maybe the “something plus” thing that has happened to them is also latent in you and can become manifest.
The outer master is simply a mirror so that you can see your face, so you can see that you also have the same face, the same possibility, the same potential. And once this has settled in your heart: “I also have the same potential, the same seed,” a great journey has started. You will never be the same again. Looking into the eyes of a living master something synchronizes in you, something is triggered in your being – a process has already started.
My inside, listen to me, the greatest spirit, the teacher, is near, wake up, wake up! But we have been asleep so long, for millions of years, for millions of lives, that sleep has become a deep-rooted habit, almost our nature. So it is even possible that you may be with a living master and still miss because the mind goes on creating new ways to go on sleeping, new rationalizations. The mind will say, “Now I have found a guru, I have found a master. What more is needed? It is enough. Now by his blessings I will become enlightened one day.”
This is a trick of the mind. Blessings are of immense help, but just blessings will not make you enlightened. Otherwise one master could make the whole earth enlightened because his heart is not miserly about blessings. He can bless the whole world – he does bless the whole world – but just his blessings won’t do. The mind can give you the idea that there is no need for you to wake up; the mind always thinks in its own old patterns.

A teacher was checking her children’s knowledge of proverbs.
“Cleanliness is next to what?” she asked.
“Impossible!” a small boy replied with great feeling.

The boy knows that the most difficult thing, just about impossible, is cleanliness. His response comes from his experience.
When you are with a living master, your responses are bound to come from your own experience. But there is every possibility you may distort things. The master may mirror your real face, but you may close your eyes, you may start dreaming about your face, you may project something else.

“What did you learn in school today?” a mother asked her young son.
He replied, “We learned that one and one, the son of a bitch, makes two. Two and two, the son of a bitch, makes four. Four and four, the son of a bitch, makes eight.”
The mother was shocked. She went to the school and complained to the teacher, “How could you teach your class such a terrible thing?”
“Madam,” said the teacher, “I taught them ‘one and one, the sum of which makes two.’”

The real master can also be misunderstood, misinterpreted. He may reflect your face, but you may go on seeing something else. You have been asleep so long that you will need to be shocked again and again.
Hence, a constant companionship with the master is needed; it can’t be a hit-and-run affair. Some people come here and they say, “We have come here for three days. Is something possible?” They don’t see the absurdity of it. They don’t see how long they have been asleep; they want to be awakened within three days. In fact, by the way they say that they are here for three days, it seems as if they are obliging me by being here for three days. Even if you became awakened after three lives, that would be too early. And yes, still I say it can happen in a single moment – it depends on you.
There is a story…

Two soldiers, utterly drunk, meet in a training camp. “Where are you from?” inquires the first soldier.
“Mobile, Alabama.” replies the second soldier.
“Mobile?” exclaims the first. “Why, I’m from Mobile.”
“What street in Mobile do you live on?” asks the second.
“Main Street and Elm Avenue,” replies the other.
“That’s where I live too!” says the second southern lad. “I live at 1195 Main Street.”
“Me too! Say, are you married?” asks the other.
“Sure am,” replies the second soldier. “Married a gal whose name was Daisy MacLee.”
“So did I!” gasps the first soldier. Then he pauses for a moment. “Hey,” he drawls, “you reckon we could be husbands-in-law?”

The fact is there are not two soldiers, only one, standing in front of a mirror. But when you are utterly drunk anything is possible. When you are utterly drunk, you need constant hammering from the master. And the truth is not far away:
My inside, listen to me, the greatest spirit, the teacher, is near,
wake up, wake up!

Run to his feet –
he is standing close to your head right now.
The original is:
…dhaya ke pitam charanan lage,
sai khada sir tere…
The original has some beauty in it: …dhaya ke pitam charanan lage… Don’t waste time, not even a single moment. Run, fall at the feet of the beloved. He has been standing there for so long, waiting and waiting for you. For lives and lives God has been waiting for you; his patience is infinite.
There are only two things that are infinite: God’s patience and man’s stupidity. If you are fortunate enough to be in the presence of a master, look into his eyes and rush inward. Don’t waste time.
…dhaya ke pitam charanan lage… The beloved is within you, the worshipper is the worshipped. The beloved is within you; you just need to go to the very core of your being. Descend from the head to the heart, and from the heart to the being. Move from thinking to feeling and from feeling to being. Just be! That is the meeting with the beloved. And the meeting is already happening, you are just not aware, you are unconscious.
Run to his feet – he is standing close to your head right now. Without finding him you will remain dissatisfied, discontented. Whatsoever you do, everything is doomed to fail. Except God nothing succeeds.
They say, “Nothing succeeds like success,” and I say to you: nothing fails like success. Once you succeed in your so-called worldly matters – money, power, prestige, respectability – then you will know that all has failed. Your money is there and so is your inner poverty; it has not changed an iota. In fact now, because of your riches, you will become more and more aware of your inner poverty, you will be able to see it more in contrast.
That’s why poor people look a little more satisfied than the rich. Not that the poor people are satisfied, not that poverty has something spiritual about it, not that poverty should be preached – enough of all those stupid things that have been told to people down the ages. The poor person looks a little more satisfied for a totally different reason: he has nothing to compare himself with, he has no contrast. He is a white line drawn on a white board. The rich man is a white line drawn on a black board – a contrast.
The richer a country gets, the more frustrated it becomes. Indians brag a lot: they think their satisfaction, their so-called contentment, has something to do with spirituality. It has nothing to do with spirituality at all. It is a simple psychological fact: they are so poor they cannot afford to be discontented. Only rich people can afford to be discontented. Only rich people really become aware of discontentment.
But one thing is certain: whatsoever you attain, if you have not attained the inner beloved, you will remain poor. You can become rich, you can become respectable, you can become virtuous, you can become a so-called saint, a mahatma, be worshipped by thousands of people, but you will remain in misery deep down, you will remain in darkness.
No one is ever satisfied. Poor men wish they were rich, rich men wish they were handsome, bachelors wish they were married, and married men wish they were dead, and so it goes, on and on. Have you ever come across a person who is really contented? If you do come across a person who is really contented, then be with him, imbibe as much of the vibes of his being as possible because that is the only way to find your inner beloved. The person who is contented must have found him.
Buddhas are surrounded by tremendous contentment, a great silence, almost tangible; you can touch it, you can feel its texture. Buddhas are surrounded by great grace; if you are not closed you will be overwhelmed by it. Buddhas are just pure love; if your hearts are open and beating, if you are still alive, then immediately a great dance will arise in your being. You will start celebrating immediately because on seeing the buddha you will immediately become aware of the inner buddha – it has been asleep for so long, but so what? Even if you have been asleep for millions of lives it makes no difference, you can wake up right now, this very moment.
Kabir says:
You have slept for millions and millions of years.

Why not wake up this morning?

…jugan jugan tohi sobat bita,

ajahu na jag sabere?
Don’t be foolish anymore. The time has come, this is the time. Buddhas always speak of this moment. …ajahu na jag sabere? The morning has come. This is the morning for which you have been waiting for so long, this is the moment. Buddhas know only one time, that is now, and only one place, that is here. Their time is always now and their space is always here. They don’t talk about yesterdays and they don’t talk about tomorrows.
…ajahu na jag sabere? The morning has come, and you are still asleep? Are you not going to wake up? Are you not going to wake up and see the sun rising? You have missed for so long, so long; but forget all about that – you can still wake up, it is still early. Whenever you wake up, it is early.
The weight of old habits is not easy to throw off. You listen, you may even feel a little understanding arising, but still your investment is in sleep. You have been dreaming such beautiful dreams in your sleep and now suddenly Kabir comes and says, “Wake up!” You would like to awake, but not right now – and the masters insist, right now. They don’t want to wait, they start shaking you. You feel angry, naturally. All the great buddhas of the world have created anger in people against them for the simple reason that they disturb sleep, and who wants to be disturbed? Particularly in the early morning when it is cold and you would like to turn over, pull the blanket up and tuck yourself in just a little more.
And people have such beautiful dreams in the early morning. You are having a beautiful dream: you have become the president of America or something, and along comes Kabir and says, “Wake up! …ajahu na jag sabere? The morning has come, and what are you doing here?”
You would like to tell him, “Shut up. Is this the moment to wake me up? It has been a hard, hard struggle for me to become the president of America. Somehow I have managed it, and now you come. Where were you before?” The weight of the dreams, of the sleep, all the investment, is great.

A man arrived at the Pearly Gates. On being asked his name he replied, “Charlie Graball.”
“I don’t think we had any notice that you were coming,” he was informed. “What was your occupation in earthly life?”
“Scrap metal merchant,” Charlie said.
“Oh,” said the angel, “I will go and inquire.”
When he returned Charlie Graball had disappeared. So had the Pearly Gates.

Old habits – a scrap metal merchant, even at the gates of heaven. Who cares about heaven? When you can escape with the gates, who bothers about heaven?
And this is the reason you go on finding new excuses for sleeping. You would not believe how much you have invested in your sleep. And the most cunning thing the mind does is make you convinced that you are not asleep at all, that you are already awake: “Kabir must be talking to somebody else.”
That’s what happens when I am talking here – you always think I must be talking about other people. I am talking about you! Sometimes it happens that when I keep on looking at one person, for two, three seconds, he starts looking here and there: “He must be looking at somebody else.” Because nobody thinks that they are Charlie Graball. No, it is always somebody else. This is one of the most powerful strategies of the mind to keep you asleep.
Gurdjieff used to tell this story again and again…

Once there was a magician who had many sheep. Every day a fat sheep was killed for him. Of course, the sheep became alert – they are not as foolish as men. They knew one thing for certain, that they were all going to be killed one day or another. So the sheep started escaping into the hills, into the forests. The magician was at a loss as to what to do; the sheep were becoming aware of their destiny.
Then he invented a strategy: he gathered all the sheep, hypnotized them and told different sheep different things. For example, he told some, “You are exceptional, you are not ordinary sheep. What happens to the others is never going to happen to you.” From that day on those sheep stopped escaping. You could have killed another sheep in front of them, and they would not be afraid because they knew they were exceptional.
Just watch your mind deep down: you all have that idea, “I am exceptional.” One Arabian proverb says that when God creates a man and sends him into the world, before he drops him down he always whispers in his ear: “You are unique, exceptional.” God goes on playing this joke, and so every person carries “I am exceptional,” deep down in his heart. That’s why you can see someone dying, but you never think, “I am going to die.” It is always someone else who dies, it is never “I”: “I am exceptional.”
To some other sheep that he hypnotized, the magician said, “You are lions, you are not sheep at all.” And from that day on they too stopped escaping. They started roaring like lions.
To yet other sheep he said, “You are not sheep, you are men. You are here to keep all the other sheep imprisoned. You are here to help me, you are my friends.” From that day on those sheep became detectives, working against their own kind. They would inform the magician if a certain sheep was trying to escape.
And to other sheep he even said, “You are magicians – not only men but magicians. You can do miracles. You are immortal.”
Once he had done all this, no sheep were escaping – and every day they were butchered.

And every day you are butchered. Every day somebody dies, somebody is killed, somebody is murdered, somebody commits suicide. Every day it is going on, but somehow, deep down, you go on believing you are exceptional. When somebody goes mad you think, “Poor fellow,” you don’t think that you also can go mad. But the difference between you and mad people is not much; it is very nominal, very minimal, only a matter of degrees. Maybe you are at ninety-nine degrees and he is at a hundred and one – just one degree more, you cross the boundary and are mad. Only one day earlier that person was as normal as you are – now he is mad. Today you are normal, tomorrow you could be mad. But in our deep sleep we have auto-hypnotized ourselves. This auto-hypnosis is what is meant by sleep, metaphysical sleep.
…jugan jugan tohi sobat bita, ajahu na jag sabere? How long have you remained auto-hypnotized, in a deep metaphysical slumber? The dawn has come. Now wake up. It is time. Don’t postpone anymore, you have postponed enough.
Why not wake up this morning?

There is a flag no one sees blowing, in the gagan, in the sky-temple.
A blue cloth has been stretched up,
it is decorated with the moon and many jewels.

Gagan math gaib nisan ure,
chandrahar chandva jahan tange,
mukata-manik marhe…
If you wake up, you will be surprised that you are living in such a tremendously beautiful world. But how can you know the beauty of it if you are asleep? You are not aware of the splendor that is showering all around. You are not aware of the glories of life, of the benediction that life is. How can you be aware of it? You are so deeply asleep, you are dreaming your private dreams, utterly unaware that the whole of existence is a constant celebration.
There is a flag no one sees blowing in the sky-temple. A blue cloth has been stretched up, it is decorated with the moon and many jewels. It is a very mysterious existence. You cannot conceive more mystery, more miracles, more splendor, more beauty. It is the ultimate of all that one can imagine, but we are missing it. It is as if a man is asleep in the garden and cannot see the roses blooming, and cannot hear the distant call of a lonely bird, and cannot see the bird on the wing, cannot see the sun and the moon and the stars. He is fast asleep. The fragrance from the roses comes to his nostrils, but he is not aware of it; the fragrance of the wet earth, but he is unaware; the dewdrops shining like pearls in the morning sun, but he is unaware of it, he is fast asleep. This is our situation.
Why not wake up this morning? …ajahu na jag sabere? Morning is knocking on your door, the sun is rising, the call has come, and you go on sleeping? This is the master’s work: hammering his disciples, going on hammering. Any moment the disciple may wake up. There are moments when you are more vulnerable, there are moments when you are more flexible, more feminine; and there are moments when you are very hard, impossible to penetrate. Hence the master goes on hammering every day. He goes on, without taking any notice of whether you are listening or not. He knows one thing: that ultimately everybody has to listen. Finally, everybody has to listen.
The sun and the moon can be seen in that place;
when looking at that, bring your mind down to silence.

…mahima tasu dekh man thir kar,
ravi-sasi jot jare…
Kabir says, if you can do only one thing, if you can attain to silence, you will know the splendor of God. …mahima tasu dekh… You can see that splendor, you can see that infinite beauty. That joy is yours. Just do one thing, become silent. It is another way of saying wake up – the mind remains asleep because of so many thoughts. Sleep simply means a continuous thought process inside you, a procession of thoughts, a continuous traffic. And it is always rush hour in there: day in, day out, thousands of thoughts and desires and imaginations and projections and memories go on rushing in a crowd. You are always surrounded by a big crowd – this is your sleep.
The inner talk has to stop. You can call it being awake, you can call it being silent – it is the same thing. To be silent is the way to be awake, or to be awake is the way to be silent; both methods have been used. Buddha uses the method of being silent so that you can be aware. Krishnamurti uses the method of being aware so that you can be silent. They are two aspects of the same coin; if you have one you will have the other automatically.
…mahima tasu dekh man thir kar… Stop this constant traffic of the mind, stop these thought processes. Then you can see the infinite beauty. …ravi-sasi jot jare… You will see the sun and the moon and the stars inside yourself. The whole sky is yours. And even the sky is not the limit – you are all. If you are ready to die as a drop, you will become the ocean.
I will tell you the truth:
the man who has drunk from that liquid wanders around like
someone insane.
This world is almost a madhouse. To be sane here will look like being insane.
H. G. Wells wrote a story…

There is a valley somewhere in Mexico, hidden deep in the mountains, where a small tribe lives. They are all blind. There is a fly found in that valley, and once a person is bitten by that fly he becomes blind. Every child is born with eyes, but it is difficult to avoid the flies; they are very common, every house is full of them. So sooner or later a child is going to be bitten by a fly and become blind. Maybe one day, two days, three days, at the most a week or two; if a child is very fortunate then one month, two months, three months. By the time he becomes a little conscious he finds himself already blind. So the whole community is blind.
A man from another community comes to visit. He has heard rumors, but he cannot believe that the whole community is blind. He sees, and he cannot believe his eyes. And he falls in love with a blind girl. But her community won’t allow them to be married. It has never happened before, there is no precedent. They cannot believe that he has eyes. They think he is mad. And of course they are in the majority. Nobody has ever heard of eyes – what is he talking about? Rainbows and colors and the sun and moon – who has ever heard of such things? He must be mad, utterly mad.
But the man is so in love and the girl is so in love that finally the community concedes, but with a condition. They say, “We have never before allowed a girl to marry someone from another community. This is happening for the first time. We will allow you to marry our girl, but with one condition: we will have to destroy your so-called eyes. We cannot allow our girl to be married to a madman. Only if you are ready to be blind, as you think we are, can you marry the girl.”

Their logic is right – if they have never heard of anybody having eyes, how can they believe?
Kahlil Gibran wrote a similar story…

A magician came into a town. He chanted a few mantras, threw something into the town well, and said, “Whosoever drinks the water of this well will go mad.” Now there were only two wells: one for the common people and one inside the palace for the king, his queen and his ministers. By evening the whole town had become mad – they had to drink the water from the town well.
The king was very happy, the queen was very happy: they had a special well – otherwise they also would have gone mad. But in the evening their happiness started to disappear because a rumor went round the town: “Our king has gone mad.” The king and queen became very frightened and scared in fact. The majority of people had gone mad, the king’s guards, the policemen, the army, everybody. Now only three people were left: the king, his queen and his prime minister. It was very dangerous, there was no protection now and the whole town was convinced that these three people had gone mad. The king asked the old prime minister, “Now what do we do?”
The prime minister said, “I will keep these people engaged, I will talk to them. You and your wife go out by the back door and drink from the town well. Later on I will go and drink from it. This is the only way.”
The king and queen went out by the back door. They drank from the town well… Of course, then they didn’t come back in by the back door, they came dancing in the front door! The people were rejoicing, they had never seen them in such a state. That night there was a great celebration in the town. The people thanked God that “Our our king and queen are sane again.”

This is the situation. The whole world is insane, hence the man of godliness looks insane. The whole world is neurotic, they have drunk from the well, the contaminated well. But they are in the majority. Now anybody who is not mad like them is a danger to their security, is a danger to their sanity, is a question mark. Not to be neurotic here, just to be healthy and whole, is very dangerous. The presence of anybody who is not mad is irritating, he has to be destroyed. Hence, you crucify Jesus, you kill Mansoor. That’s why thousands of people are against me, for the simple reason that they are neurotic.
Kabir says: I will tell you the truth… I will not tell you to wake up without telling you the truth. He is saying, “Let me tell you the truth: if you decide to wake up one thing is certain – you will be thought mad. You have to take that risk. Otherwise you will go on sleeping, go on dreaming, remain part of the mad crowd. But please don’t blame me later on.” That’s why Kabir says, I will tell you the truth… if you decide to wake up. Maybe listening to Kabir or to Buddha or to me, you start deciding to wake up. The truth has to be told beforehand, before you decide to wake up.
…the man who has drunk from that liquid wanders around like someone insane. You have to risk your so-called sanity. It is insanity – but you will have to risk it, and you will have to be ready to accept the world of the few sane people. They are very few – Mansoor and Jesus and Buddha and Kabir and Farid and Nanak… They are very few, they can be counted on the fingers. If you wake up you will become part of that small, fortunate minority, but you will be thought insane by the people.
…kahe Kabir piye joi jan, mana firat mare.
Not only that, you will live like a madman in the world; you will also die like a madman. But it is worth it, the risk is worth taking. It is better to be mad like Kabir than to be sane like Morarji Desai. It is better to be mad like Jesus than to be sane like Pontius Pilate. It is a great decision; guts are needed, great courage is needed.
Sannyas – initiation into the world of truth – is not for cowards. Cowards can go on rationalizing, cowards can go on sleeping, dreaming. Cowards can even start dreaming that they are awake, but they will not risk anything. They remain part of the mob, the insane crowd. And of course their lives will remain ones of misery, of pain, of agony.
If you want to be ecstatic, risk – risk all. Only by risking all does one attain all. Blessed are those who are drunk with God. Blessed are those who are mad for God. Blessed are those who are no longer part of the insane crowd but have learned a new way of insanity – the way of the buddhas.
…kahe Kabir piye joi jan… It is very rare that somebody decides to risk all because it is very rare for someone to be so courageous, so brave. …mana firat mare. Then he lives like a madman, in utter ecstasy, in absolute benediction; and he dies in utter ecstasy, in absolute benediction. Life can be a celebration – and death too, but you will need to risk all.
And that’s what my whole effort here is: to seduce you into risking all for the divine. Remember, you have slept enough and you have not found anything, you have dreamed enough and your hands are empty, you have thought enough, and where have you arrived? Now wake up.
Friend, now wake up!
Enough for today.