---
title: Vedanta Seven Steps to Samadhi 01
series: Vedanta Seven Steps to Samadhi 01-17
talk_number: 1
url: https://oshoworld.com/vedanta-seven-steps-to-samadhi-01
language: English
duration: 02:04:14
author: THE UPANISHADS
scraped_at: 2026-01-03T09:37:09.403716+00:00
---
The Akshi Upanishad.

Aum, may my speech be rooted in my mind,
and my mind rooted in my speech.
O self-illumined Brahman, be manifest unto me.
Speech and mind form the basis of my knowledge,
so please do not undo my pursuit of knowledge.
Day and night I spend in this pursuit.
I shall speak the law; I shall speak the truth.
May Brahman protect me;
may he protect the speaker, protect the speaker.
Aum, shanti, shanti, shanti.
The ultimate truth is not far away, it is not distant. It is near you, close, closer than you are to yourself, but still you go on missing it, and you have been missing it for millions of lives. This continuous missing has become a habit. Unless this habit is broken, the closest remains the most distant; unless this habit is transcended, God, truth, or whatsoever we may call it, remains just a myth, a theory, a doctrine, a belief, but not an experience.
And unless the divine is your experience, the belief is futile. It is not going to help you; on the contrary it may hinder you, because just by believing in it you deceive yourself that somehow you have known it. The belief becomes the deception. It doesn’t become an opening, it closes you. It makes you knowledgeable without knowing it; it gives you a feeling of knowledge without any intimate experience of it.
Remember, untruth is not such a great hindrance as the belief in the truth. If you believe you stop seeking; if you believe you have already taken it for granted. It cannot be so. You will have to pass through a mutation; really you will have to die and be born again. Unless the seed that you are dies, the new life cannot sprout out of it. Belief becomes a barrier; it gives you a false assurance that you have known–but that is all you have got. Belief is just borrowed. A Buddha says something, a Jesus says something, or a Mohammed, and then we go on following it, believing in it. This can create such a situation within you that the distant will appear close and the closest will continue to appear distant–it creates an illusory mind.

I have heard one Sufi story. Once it happened that a fish in the ocean heard somebody talking about the ocean, and the fish heard for the first time that there exists something like the ocean. She started to search, she started to ask and in-quire, but nobody knew where the ocean was. She asked many fish, great and small, known and unknown, famous and not so famous, but nobody was capable of answering where the ocean is. They all said they have heard about it; they all said, “Sometime in the past our ancestors knew it – it is written in the scriptures.” And the ocean was all around! They were in the ocean; they were talking, living in the ocean.
Sometimes it happens that the closest, the nearest, is so obvious that you can forget it. The nearest is so near that you cannot look at it, because even to look at something a certain distance is needed, space is needed. And there is no space between you and the divine; there is no space between the fish and the ocean – no gap. The fish is part of the ocean, just like a wave; or the ocean is just the infinite spread of the being of the fish. They are not two; they exist together, their being is joined together. Their bodies may appear different but their inner spirit is one, it is unitary.
The same is the situation with us. We go on asking about God – whether God exists or not – and we argue much for and against. Some believe, some disbelieve; some say it is just a myth and some say it is the only truth, but they all depend on scriptures, nobody has an immediate experience. When I say immediate experience I mean experience that has grown into you, or into which you have grown…intimate, so intimate that you cannot feel where you end and that experience begins.
God cannot be an object of any search; he remains the very subjectivity. You are not going to find him somewhere because he is everywhere, and if you start looking for him somewhere you will not find him anywhere. All that is, is divine. God just means the whole existence, the totality, the ocean that surrounds you, the ocean of life.
The first thing to remember before we enter into this intimate search and inquiry, into this intimate experience that people have always called God, or Buddha has called nirvana, or Jesus has called the kingdom of God – names differ, but the experience indicated is the same – the first thing to remember is: it is not far away, it is where you are. Right now you are sitting in him, breathing in him, breathing him, through him.
This has to be continuously remembered, constantly remembered; don’t forget it for a single moment, because the moment you forget it the whole search becomes wrong. Then you start looking somewhere. Maintain it; remember it continuously at least for these eight or nine days – that it is exactly where you are. The very center of your being is its center also.
If this is remembered the whole search will become qualitatively different. Then you are not in search of something outside, but something inner. Then you are not in search of something which is going to happen in the future, it can happen right now; it is already happening. And then the whole thing becomes very relaxed. If the truth is somewhere in the future then you are bound to be tense, then you are bound to be worried, a deep anxiety is bound to be there. Who knows whether it will happen in the future or not? The future is uncertain; you may miss it – you have been missing so long. But if the divine is here and now, the very existence, the very breath, the very you, then there is no uncertainty, then there is no worry, no anxiety.
Even if you go on missing, you cannot miss him. You may have missed him for so many many lives, but really you have never missed him because he has always been hidden there, waiting for you to turn within. You have been looking outside, you have been focused on the objective world, and that which you are seeking is hidden within, it is your subjectivity.
God is not an object; God doesn’t exist as an object. Whatsoever theologians say, they are absolutely wrong – God doesn’t exist as an object. You cannot worship, because he is hidden in the worshipper. You cannot pray, because he is hidden there from where the prayer arises. You cannot seek him without, because he is your within-ness.
The first thing to remember is this, because if it is remembered then the whole effort becomes qualitatively different. Then you are not going somewhere, then there is no hurry, then there is no impatience. Rather, on the contrary, the more patience that happens to you, the easier becomes the search; the more you are not seeking him, the closer he is to you. When you are not seeking at all, when you are just being, not going anywhere, after anything, you have reached, the thing has happened.
This search is going to be qualitatively different. This search is, in a way, a no-search; this seeking is, in a way, a no-seeking. The more you seek, the more you will miss. If he was far away then it would have been alright. He is here, he is now. This very moment God is happening to you, because you cannot be without him. He is the ocean, you are the fish.
So don’t be in a hurry and don’t be impatient. There is no goal; the very effort is the goal. We will not be meditating to gain something, to achieve something; the very meditation is the goal. Meditation is not a means, it is the end. So don’t force yourself; rather, relax. Don’t run after something, some ultimate, some God, some x, y, z; rather stand still. The moment you are in a total standstill you have reached. Then there is no more. And this can be done any moment. If you understand, this can happen this very moment. God is life, God is existence, God is the case.
But there are problems; theologians have created them. The first problem they have created, and because of which this remembering becomes impossible – to remember that you are already divine becomes impossible – is a very deep condemnatory attitude. You go on condemning yourself: you are the sinner. They have created guilt in you. So how can a sinner be, right this very moment, the divine? He will have to get rid of the sin; he will have to suffer for his sins, and time will be needed. He will have to pass through purifications, and only when he has become holy, a saint, will he have a glimpse of the divine.
Particularly in the West, Christianity has given everybody a deep guilt complex. Everybody is guilty – not only about your own sins that you have committed, but also about the sin that Adam committed in the very beginning. You are guilty for it. You carry a burden, a long burden of guilt, so how can you think, imagine, conceive, that right this very moment God is happening to you? The Devil can happen, can be imagined, but not God. You can think of yourself as the Devil but never as the divine.
This creation of a guilt complex was needed not for you, but for religions. Their business can continue only if they create guilt in you. The whole business of religion depends on the guilt feelings that they can create in the masses. Churches, temples, religions exist on your guilt. God has not created them, your guilt has created them. When you feel guilty you need a priest to confess to; when you feel guilty you need someone to lead you, to purify you. When you feel guilty you have lost your center – now somebody can lead you.
You can become a follower only when you have lost your center. If you are right in your center, no question of following arises. You can become part of a crowd only when you are not yourself. So you belong to Christianity, or Hinduism, or Mohammedanism – these “belongings” are simply guilt feelings. You cannot be alone. You are so guilty you cannot rely on yourself, you cannot depend on yourself, you cannot be independent. Somebody, some great organization, some cult, creed, is needed, so under its blanket you can hide, and you can forget your guilt. And then you need some savior, you need someone who can suffer for your sins. This is just absurd.
Christians say Jesus suffered for the sin of the whole humanity. The whole logic is absurd. Adam committed the sin, you are guilty for it! Then Jesus suffers for you, and your guilt is forgiven, your sin is forgiven. So the whole deal is between Adam and Jesus – you are just puppets. Sometimes Adam leads you so you move into sin, sometimes Jesus leads you so you move into the kingdom of God, but you yourself are nothing. But to exploit, religions had to create the guilt feeling. Because of that guilt feeling that you are not accepted as you are, you cannot conceive of yourself as already in the divine, being divine.
With me this guilt feeling has to be dropped. You are not a sinner and you are not guilty. Whatsoever you are the existence accepts you. Whatsoever you are playing, whatsoever game, it is so because the divine wills it so. As you are, you are accepted.
This is the second thing to remember: don’t condemn yourself, otherwise nothing can be done. Don’t reject yourself, don’t be an enemy to yourself. Be loving, be friendly, and accept whatsoever you are. I am not saying that there is nothing wrong in you. I am not saying that you don’t need any transformation. You need it, there are many wrongs, but those wrongs are not sins; they are illnesses, diseases.
Someone has a fever: he is not a sinner, he needs our compassion, our help to come out of it. If we just condemn then he will also condemn his fever and then the whole thing goes wrong, because once you condemn your fever you start suppressing it. Then the man cannot say to others, “I am feeling fever, I am feverish,” because the moment he says it everybody will think he is a sinner. So he goes on saying, “I am healthy. Who says that I have a fever? If the thermometer shows it the thermometer must be wrong. I am okay.” He cannot accept his fever and then nothing can be done. He goes on hiding and suppressing. That is what you have been doing.
There are many wrongs, but remember, those wrongs are just illnesses, not sins; errors, mistakes, but not sins. You are not guilty. You may be ignorant; you may not be knowing as much as is needed to live a pure and innocent life, but that means you are ignorant, innocent – not guilty. Try to understand the distinction very well, because on it depends much.
In this camp, to me you are divine. You may be erroneous, the god within you may be ill, the god within you may be ignorant, the god within you may be committing many mistakes – but the god is not committing any sin. What is the difference? When you commit a mistake you don’t condemn yourself, you try to understand why you committed it. The mistake is condemned but not you. When you call it a sin, you are condemned – you are wrong, not an act.
Your acts may be wrong, but you are not. You are totally accepted as you are. Your being is the highest flower that has happened to this earth. You are the salt of this earth. Howsoever erroneous, you are the very glory of existence.
Remember this: I accept you and I want you to accept yourself.
Not that there is going to be no transformation, but that only through this acceptance transformation becomes possible. Once you accept your being there is no suppression, once you accept your being the whole being comes into consciousness. There is no need to hide and to push some parts, fragments, into the darkness, into the unconscious.
The unconscious is a by-product of Christianity. There is nothing like the unconscious. If you accept yourself, your whole mind will be conscious. If you deny, reject, condemn, then the condemned parts will move into darkness. Not that they will not act now, they will act more, but their action will be now hidden, perverted, disguised. It will not be apparent, it will take a hidden course. You cannot face it directly but it goes on working. The unconscious is created by guilt.
Once you accept that there is no unconscious, the barrier has gone, the boundary disappeared, and the conscious and unconscious become one – as they are really, as they should be. And when your conscious and unconscious are one you can meditate, never before it. Once your inner divisions disappear, once you become one inside, a deep silence descends upon you, a great blissful moment is reached – just by the disappearance of the boundaries, divisions, fragments.
When you become one you become healthy; when you become one you feel a silent well-being. Moment to moment you feel grateful to existence, a gratitude happens to you, and this gratitude I call prayer. It is not a prayer to some god. This gratitude is an inner attitude towards existence which has given you life, love, light; towards this existence which has blessed you in millions and millions of ways, and which goes on showering upon you more and more blessings – but a unity is needed within.
So this is the second point to remember: don’t feel guilty, don’t feel yourself a sinner, don’t feel that you are wrong. If you were wrong you would not have been. You are there because God wants to preserve you. You are there because God loves you. You are there, that’s why the whole existence supports you. You are there because you are worth the trouble. Accept yourself, have a loving attitude towards yourself.
Jesus says somewhere: Love your enemies as yourself. But no one loves himself, so how can you love your enemies as yourself? You simply hate yourself. If you love yourself, to me you have become religious. And a person who loves himself, only he can love others; a person who hates himself deep down cannot love anybody.
If you cannot love yourself how can you love anybody? If you cannot accept yourself how can you accept anybody? So your so-called saints who go on condemning themselves, they go on condemning the whole world – they are condemning everybody. The moment they condemn themselves they condemn the whole world. You are the nearest; if existence in you is condemned, then how can you accept existence that is far away from you, existing in others? No guilt, no condemnation. Wrongs are there, but those wrongs are not in your being but in your doing; in your acts, not in you. And your acts are wrong because you are not aware – not that you are a sinner. Those wrongs exist because you are not alert. The god is asleep in you, fast asleep; sometimes you can even hear the snoring – fast asleep.
My effort in this camp is going to be to make that god a little alert, to disturb the inner sleep, to help him awake. It is not condemnatory. And once you start being alert, you have started being different. Perfectly aware, you have reached; perfectly aware, you are in nirvana, in the kingdom of God.
The third thing to remember: in this camp we will be doing many things, many techniques, many methods, but hidden behind every technique and method is the basic thing and that is, search for awareness, search for more consciousness. So whatsoever you are doing here, remain alert, remain conscious, remain a witness. Doing meditation remain conscious, remain a witness. Doing meditation, dancing, doing kirtan and singing, remain alert, don’t become unconscious.
Whatsoever is happening, a center within you goes on looking at it, a center remains a watcher. Your body may be going mad, your body may be jumping, shrieking, screaming, your mind may have become a whirlpool – but a watcher remains. Go on constantly remembering that you are watching, because that watcher is the thing. That watcher has to be brought more and more into force. So while your body is doing many things, your mind is doing many things, one thing deeply hidden within you goes on looking at it all. Don’t lose contact with that.
I am going to create a situation in these days in which your body will become very active, your mind will go through many catharses, much activity will be there, but simultaneously, side by side, remain alert, passively looking at all that is happening as if you are not only the actor but the audience also. Doing, watching – this watching must be continued moment to moment, not only while you are meditating. You are walking, you are eating, taking a bath, talking with someone, going to sleep – go on watching everything that is happening.
For these eight days devote all your energies to moving towards being a witness. Eating, let the body eat – you watch also. Walking, let the legs move – you watch also. Hearing me, listening to me, let the ears listen, let the mind absorb – you watch also. You remain a witness. Continuously hammering for the witness will help your god to be awake, and once your god is awake you yourself are a Jesus, a Buddha, a Krishna – then you don’t lack anything. Right now also you don’t lack anything, except that the god in Krishna or Christ is awake and in you fast asleep.
There is nothing wrong in sleep also, but in sleep many errors are committed. You move in sleep, then you commit many mistakes. If you love committing mistakes then there is no problem, but remember that when you commit mistakes you suffer also. That suffering doesn’t come from Adam’s sin – it comes from you. If you commit a mistake you suffer, pain results. All suffering is a by-product of ignorance. So if you enjoy your suffering then it is okay, then don’t make any effort for any change. Sleep is good and you enjoy your suffering. But if you don’t enjoy your suffering then something has to be done. Prayers won’t help, only conscious effort will help you.
A few instructions and then I will move to the sutra.
When you go to sleep tonight and every night following, before going to sleep put off the light, sit on your bed, close your eyes and exhale deeply through the mouth with the sound O – Ooooo. Go on exhaling with the sound O, as deeply as possible. Your stomach goes in, the air moves out, and you go on creating the sound O. Remember, I am not saying aum, I am saying simply O. It will become aum automatically. You need not make it, then it is false. You simply create the sound O. When it becomes more harmonious and you are enjoying it, suddenly you will become aware it has become aum. But don’t force it to become aum, then it is false. When it becomes spontaneously aum then it is something vibrating from within. And this sound aum is the deepest sound, the most harmonious, the most basic.
When it happens and you enjoy and you flow in its music, your whole body and your brain relax. With the sound aum you will go on relaxing and your sleep will have a different quality, altogether different. And your sleep has to be changed, only then can you become more alert and aware. So we will start by changing the sleep.
In the night put the light off, sit on the bed, exhale deeply through the mouth with the sound O. When you have exhaled completely and you feel that now no more exhalation is possible, the whole breath has gone out, stop for a single moment. Don’t inhale, don’t exhale – just stop. In that stop you are the divine. In that stop you are not doing anything, not even breathing. In that stop you are in the ocean.
Just remain in the stop for a single moment and be a witness – just look at what is happening. Be aware where you are: witness the whole situation that is there in that single stopped moment. Time is no more there, because time moves with breaths; breathing is the process of time. Because you breathe you feel the time moving. When you don’t breathe you are just like a dead man. Time has stopped, there is no process anywhere, everything has stopped…as if the whole existence has stopped with you. In that stopping you can become aware of the deepest source of your being and energy. So for a single moment stop. Then inhale through the nose, but don’t make any effort to inhale.
Remember, make all the effort to exhale, but don’t make any effort to inhale; just let the body inhale. You simply relax your hold and let the body take the inhalation. You don’t do anything. That too is beautiful and works wonders. You have exhaled, stopped for a moment, then you allow the body to inhale. You don’t make any effort to inhale, you simply watch the body taking the inhalation. And when you watch the body taking the inhalation you will feel a deep silence surrounding you, because then you know your effort is not needed for life. Life breathes itself. It moves by itself of its own cause. It is a river, you unnecessarily go on pushing it. You will see that the body is taking the inhalation. Your effort is not needed, your ego is not needed – you are not needed. You simply become a watcher, you simply see the body taking the inhalation. Deep silence will be felt. When the body has taken a full inhalation, stop for a single moment again. Again watch.
These two moments are totally different. When you have exhaled completely and stopped, that stopping is just like death. When you have inhaled totally and then stopped, that stopping is the climax of life. Remember, inhalation is equivalent to life, exhalation equivalent to death. That’s why the first thing a child does when born is to inhale, and the last thing the same child will do when old, dying, will be to exhale. On this earth, the first thing you did while entering life was inhalation, and the last thing you will do will be exhalation. No one can die inhaling. When you die you have to exhale, you die with exhalation. And no one can be born with exhalation, you have to start by inhalation.
Those who know, and those who have watched their inner life process deeply, they say – and you will come to feel it yourself – that with every inhalation you are born again and with every exhalation you die. So death is not something in the end, and birth is not something in the beginning; every moment there is birth and death, every moment you die and are born again. And if you die beautifully you are born again more beautifully, if you die totally you are born totally.
So exhale as totally as possible; that will give you a death moment. That’s beautiful, because a death moment is the most silent, the most peaceful – that is nirvana. Then let the body inhale to the full, and then stop. That moment is a life moment: the climax of energy, power, bioenergy at its peak. Feel it, and feel both. That’s why I say stop twice: when you have exhaled, then; and when you have inhaled, then – so you can feel both life and death, so you can watch both life and death.
Once you know this is life, this is death, you have transcended both. The witness is neither death nor life. The witness is never born and never dies; only the body, the mechanism. You become the third. These two moments are very significant. This very night you have to do this meditation, for twenty minutes you go on doing this and then fall down and go to sleep.
In the morning when you feel the sleep has left you, don’t open your eyes immediately. The mind has the tendency to open the eyes immediately. You miss a great opportunity…because when sleep leaves you and life energies are wakening inside, you can watch them, and that watching will be very helpful for going into deeper meditation.
The mind is fresh, the body is fresh after the whole night’s rest; everything is fresh, unburdened. There is no dust, no tiredness – you can look deeply, penetratingly. Your eyes are fresher; everything is vital. Don’t miss that moment. When you feel sleep has left, don’t open the eyes immediately. Remain with closed eyes and feel the energy which is changing now from sleep to waking. And that’s what I am going to teach you: how to change all your energies from sleep to waking. So just watch.
You may be lethargic in that moment, you would like to turn over and go to sleep again, so do one thing: for three minutes with closed eyes stretch your body like a cat. But with closed eyes; don’t open the eyes and don’t look at the body from without. Look at the body from within. Stretch, move, and let the body energy flow, and feel it. When it is fresh it is good to feel it; the feeling will remain with you the whole day.
Do this for two or three minutes –if you enjoy it, five minutes. And then for two or three minutes laugh loudly like a madman, but with closed eyes, don’t open the eyes. With closed eyes laugh loudly. The energies are there, flowing; the body is awake and alert and vital. The sleep has gone. You are filled, flooded with new energy.
The first thing to be done is laughter, because that sets the trend for the whole day. If you do it, you will feel within two or three days that your mood remains the whole day the mood of laughing, enjoying. Don’t be afraid of what others will say, because they may be just waiting for you – so laugh and help them to laugh.
Remember, the first thing in the day sets the trend, and the last thing in the night also sets the trend. So begin your sleep with a deep relaxation so the whole night becomes samadhi, the whole night becomes a deep meditation – relaxed. Six, seven, eight hours – it is a long time. If you live for sixty years, twenty years you will be in your bed. Twenty years is a long time, and if you can change the quality of sleep you need not go to a forest to meditate; twenty years – enough! No need to go anywhere, no need to do anything. If you can change your sleep there is no need to go like Mahavira in the forest for twelve years, or like Buddha for six years. Twenty years is a long time, and you are not doing anything in that sleep so meditation is easy, because meditation is more like nondoing than like doing. It is a deep relaxation.
Relax when you go to sleep and laugh when you come out of sleep. That laughter should be the first prayer. Remember that if you can laugh, sooner or later you will come to believe in God. A person who laughs cannot remain an atheist for long, and a person who is sad, whatsoever he may say, cannot be really a believer in God, because sadness shows that he rejects, sadness shows that he is against, sadness shows that he denies, condemns. Laughter shows a deep acceptance, laughter shows a celebration, laughter shows that life is good.
First thing in the morning stretch your body like a cat so you can feel energy, move like a cat, and then laugh, and only then get out of the bed. Then the whole day is going to be different. Then we will be doing three meditations in the day.
In the morning a meditation of four steps, the last really not a step but a jump. The first step: ten minutes of fast chaotic breathing. This breathing is used just like a hammer to hammer your energies, particularly energies which are hidden in the sex center. And you exist right now as a sex center, because your whole energy moves into that center. Your contact with the world is through that center, you are related to the world through that center. And unless energy erupts upwards, flows upwards to other centers which are there, nonfunctioning, you cannot change, you cannot be transformed.
The higher the energy moves, through higher centers you are related to the world. When from the highest center you relate to the world, you have become divine and the whole world is divine; from the lowest center, sex, you are an animal and the whole world is also animal. Darwins and Huxleys and others who have worked hard to prove that man has evolved out of animals are right, their research is right, but they have not studied a buddha; they have studied the ordinary human being. The ordinary human being is related with the animal kingdom. He remains an animal, just a little more sophisticated. Mark Twain writes somewhere that the cauliflower is a cabbage with a college education. That’s the only difference between animal and man – a little more sophisticated animal with a college education, with a culture. But he remains an animal, and because he is educated he becomes more dangerous.
The higher your energy moves, the more new realms of existence will be revealed to you. And if the Upanishads, if Vedantins, Buddha and Jesus and people like them have declared that everyone is divine, they could say so only because they were related to the universe from their highest center. Your energy has to be moved from the sex center to the sahasrar, that which is hidden in your head.
This chaotic breathing, the first step, is just to be used as a hammer. It works, it is not a theory; you can do it and you can know it, and you will know it.
The second step for ten minutes will be of catharsis. You have to bring out, act out, whatsoever you have been suppressing up to now. Whatsoever you have suppressed has to be thrown out, because only then can you become flowerlike, weightless, and only then can you fly, only then can you rise upwards. All the burden has to be dropped down.

I have heard one story about Hotei, a Zen master. One day he was passing through a village. On his shoulders he always carried a very big bag full of many toys, chocolates and sweets for children. Somebody asked him, “Hotei, we have heard that you are just playing a role, acting. We have heard that you are a Zen master, so why do you go on wasting your time just giving toys to children? And if you are really a Zen master then show us what Zen is.” Zen means the real spirit of religion.
Hotei dropped his bag, immediately he dropped his bag. They couldn’t follow, so they said, “What do you mean?”
He said, “This is all. If you drop the burden, this is all.”
They asked, “Okay, then what is the next step?”
So he put his bag again on his shoulders and started walking. “This is the next step. But now I am not carrying. I know now that the burden is not me. Now the whole burden has become just toys for children and they will enjoy it.”

The second step is to drop the bag that you are carrying, and carry it again only when you are not carrying it. Then you can carry the whole world; then there is no problem – you are not identified with it. The second step is to drop the bag. So be Hotei, and drop whatsoever you have been carrying so long. And it is just ugly, whatsoever you are carrying. Sadness, ugliness, hatred, suffering, anger, jealousy – things like this you are carrying. And if you have become a big wound it is no surprise, it is what you are carrying. So in the second step you have to throw down whatsoever there is in it.
You will look mad, because madness is there. You have been suppressing it up to now. Your sanity is false, it is just on the surface, not even skin-deep. You can be made insane immediately. Someone hits you and the sanity is gone, someone insults you and the sanity is gone. It is not even skin-deep, it is just there boiling. You are carrying yourself somehow. You are a miracle. How do you go on with so many madnesses within? How do you manage it? In the second step don’t manage, just throw it out. Become mad, go mad.
Remember, when you become mad consciously you remain a witness. Mad-ness is beautiful if you are conscious – you enjoy it. The more you throw it out the less burdened you are, and you feel that your energy is purified. You feel that now you can fly in the sky. Now there are no boundaries to you, you have be-come weightless. Now the whole gravitation of the earth cannot pull you down to the earth, you have become greater. You can transcend this pull now; this pull works because you carry so much burden. The second step is to go mad consciously. Those who are intelligent will go mad consciously, those who are stupid will go on holding. So don’t be stupid; be a man of understanding and try it.
The third step is a Sufi mantra, hoo; not w-h-o, just h-o-o – hoo without meaning. This is just a sound with no meaning at all; it has a significance but no meaning. It is just a technique. This sound hoo goes deepest in you, hits your deepest center, releases energy. Your whole body becomes aflame with a new energy that you have not known because you have never hit it.
You are so afraid of yourself that you never hit your sources of energy, because you don’t know what you will do if much energy comes to you, and you are also afraid you may do something wrong if energy comes to you. So people remain consciously weak. If you are afraid of sex you will be afraid of energy, because if energy comes it will start moving in the sex center. Then what to do? So these so-called saints go on starving their bodies just to remain weak; their whole saintliness is nothing but a sort of weakness, a sort of impotence. And an impotent person can never be holy – because you don’t have energy to be holy. If you don’t have energy to be unholy, how can you have energy to be holy? The same energy moves from unholiness to holiness.
The third is just a technique, a sound which hits your hidden sources of energy which you are scared to hit. Your whole body will become aflame with new life, new energy, new heat, new electricity, and when your whole body has become vital, every cell of it, only then the jump can be taken, never before it.
Religion is not for weak people. Of course, if you go looking in temples, mosques and churches you will find weak persons there, kneeling down, praying – just weak. They are there because they are weak and they are in search of some help: somebody to protect them, somebody to give them security, safety.
But I say to you, religion is not for the weak, it is only for the strong, because it is such a jump. It is a total jump from the known to the unknown. The weak cannot take it. They can travel step by step, but they can never take a jump.
And remember, if you travel step by step, gradually, you are never transformed; you are at the most modified. You remain the same. A little refined, modified, a little change here and there, but you remain the same. A little better looking, but all ugliness hidden inside, just colored. Only those who are strong enough, who are erupting with energy, exploding with energy, can take the jump.
And this is the greatest jump and the greatest challenge – from the known into the unknown. Whatsoever you are you know, and where I am trying to indicate is the unknown. In all these days the abyss will be just near you. Any moment you can jump, but you will have to create energy.
This third step is to create energy, to make a volcano – and then I will leave it to you. When I see that now you are boiling, exploding, I will say, “Stop.” And when I say stop, don’t go on doing things. Whatsoever you were doing, stop immediately, go dead, because if you go on doing you will lose energy and the jump will not be possible. When I say stop, stop exactly at that moment. When you hear me say stop after the third step, you stop as you are. Even if the posture is uncomfortable don’t change it, don’t make it comfortable, because here we are not in search of comfort. And don’t deceive, because you are not deceiving anybody except yourself.
When I say stop, it is meaningful that I am saying it at that particular moment. It is when I feel that now you have worked up, you have created the energy; now the right peak has been reached. When I say stop, stop immediately. Become a statue, a stone, a rock – no movement. Don’t allow the energy to be expressed in any way, so the energy becomes integrated within and it comes with such a force that you can take the jump. The jump will happen by itself; you just create the energy. When I say stop, you stop.
The fourth step is a jump. You remain silent, just like a rock. In that moment of silence and stoppage, energy will be there – so much you cannot hold it; it will have to explode. And it will move from the sex center upwards. As it moves upwards you will feel a transformation, a change. You are not the same; moment to moment something else is coming into being. When this energy touches the head center, the last center, sahasrar…Hindus have said it is as if a lotus of one thousand petals has opened suddenly. You are filled with benediction, bliss, beatitude. This for the morning.
In the afternoon from four to five we will be doing kirtan – singing and dancing. Twenty minutes dancing, singing; twenty minutes silence, waiting; then twenty minutes expressing your joy, your happiness – celebration. For the first twenty minutes you have to do it so much, so deeply, so totally, that your whole bodymind is exhausted. It has to be exhausted. So don’t save yourself, don’t try not to get tired. That is the whole point: you have to be tired, so tired that the body and the mind, the old pattern, simply drops through tiredness, exhausted. So get exhausted. Go mad fast!
For twenty minutes you have to exhaust all your energies so the pattern cannot hold, and then you drop into relaxation. For those twenty minutes, if you are really exhausted you will feel some unknown source has become open to you, as if some unknown ocean is dropping into you. You will be filled with new life, and then celebration becomes possible. Then celebrate it, then dance and go mad, but remain constantly alert and watch whatsoever is happening.
In the morning, evening and night we will be doing group meditations; these are group meditations. One meditation is for you to do individually. From four to five we will do kirtan – singing and dancing. From three to four you move alone. Don’t go with anybody, just move alone. Go under a tree, near a rock, or anywhere. If you cannot find any place then just sit outside your room, but be under the sky, don’t do it in the room. This is to be done individually, and everyone has to do it; don’t try to escape it.
Move to a tree, sit, look at the sky. Don’t look at anything in particular, just look vacantly with empty eyes so that the whole sky can be in contact. When you look at something you are narrowed. Then you are focused, then your eyes can take in only one thing; they are exclusive. Just look vacantly so the whole sky becomes available to your eyes. Looking at the sky, for twenty minutes start talking gibberish, just nonsense. Because the sky cannot understand your language, don’t use your language, it is useless – the sky cannot understand it. Gibberish….
You may not be aware from where this word gibberish comes. It comes from a Sufi saint whose name was Jabbar, and he used to talk nonsense. He would talk in such a way that nobody would be able to understand what he was saying. So because it started with Jabbar, people started calling it gibberish. The English word gibberish comes from the Sufi mystic Jabbar.
So become Jabbar: talk gibberish, nonsense, sounds, gestures, to the sky, not to anybody else. You are talking to the sky. There is a Christian sect who call this type of meditation glossolalia – talking in tongues. And as far as I know, in the whole of Christianity only that sect knows something. Whatsoever comes in the mind, say it: sometimes just sounds, sometimes animal sounds, sometimes screaming, howling, yelling, whatsoever. And don’t try to create any sense, because that will be nonsense – creating sense with the sky. You are not talking to any human being; you are talking to the vast sky which cannot understand any language and which can understand anything.
Language will not be helpful. Why? – because if you go on with the pattern of language you never transcend your mind. When you talk with the sky without meaningful communication the mind simply drops; it has no use, it cannot continue. The mind will try to say to you, “What nonsense are you doing? Are you mad?” Don’t listen to it. Just tell it, “You wait, and let me do whatsoever I am doing.” Enjoy it.
For twenty minutes go completely Jabbar-like, gibberish, and then for twenty minutes silently relax. Go on looking at the sky if you feel like it, or if you don’t feel like it, close your eyes and look to the inner sky. After these twenty minutes of nonsense you will feel so silent, so skylike, such a vast space within you, that you cannot imagine what can happen out of it.
But go alone, because if someone is there your mind will start playing tricks. If someone is there you would like to create some sense of whatsoever you are doing, because everybody is such an exhibitionist. Or you may create some nonsense just to impress others that you are creating nonsense. That is not the point. You have to be authentic about it. It is not for somebody else, it is for the sky.
And you cannot deceive the sky. The sky has known millions and millions and millions like you. You also for millions and millions of lives the sky has known. We all come out of it and we all go back into it. Be in contact with space. If you can be in contact with space a space is created within you, and when these two spaces meet there is ecstasy. This is to be done individually, then kirtan in the group.
In the night we will have a third meditation, a group meditation. You have to stare at me – it is a tratak. I will be standing here; you have to stare at me without blinking. The eyes will get tired, tears will start rolling down – let them. Go on staring at me so that I can meet you, you can meet me. Just by talking meeting cannot take place. I talk only to persuade you into something else which cannot be given through talk. So talk is just a seduction for something else, for something else which cannot be communicated through words.
That’s why this meditation is the last in the night. The whole day I prepare you. I prepare you to go more and more mad, so by the time night comes you are already insane and you can do something which the mind would not have allowed you to do – stare at me with nonblinking eyes. Why nonblinking eyes? When you blink, mind changes. You may not be aware that your blinking depends on the mind. When you are really interested in something blinking stops. That’s why your eyes get tired in a film.
Watching a film, the film is not destructive to the eyes, but your eyes stop blinking. You are so interested you forget blinking. You go on staring, that’s why your eyes get tired. And staring at a film is dangerous because you are staring at something which belongs to the lowest of the centers. So if you go to see a movie, if at all you go, continuously blink. Be less concerned with seeing and more concerned with blinking, so you are not hypnotized and the film cannot provoke your lowest center. All films are hitting at the sex center, that’s their appeal.
In this third method in the night, you have to stare at me. I want to hit at your sahasrar, the peak, the last, the highest center. Unblinking will be needed as it is needed for the lowest center. Unblinking you look at me: the mind stops. Then a flow starts; then you and I are not two, a bridge is there. I can move in you, you can move in me – a deep communion is possible.
You will be standing while doing this, and you have to go on jumping with your hands raised so that you forget the feeling of the body and you become energy – jumping, moving, dynamic. As you are, your body has become static. With static energy communication is not possible; only with a moving energy, a jumping energy, is contact possible. When energy is static it becomes like ice – dead, frozen. When energy is moving the ice melts, it becomes a river, flowing. And if you go on moving, a moment comes when your energy is not even like water; it becomes like vapor – invisible, rising upwards.
Remember, ice is static, cannot move; water is moving, dynamic, but can only move downwards; vapor is invisible, moving, but can only move upwards. These are the three states of your energy also. Every energy can have three states: the solid, the liquid, the vaporous.
You have to go on jumping with raised hands so you become a movement. Everybody will be jumping, and soon static energies will mingle with each other, they will become a dance. And you will be constantly, simultaneously, using the mantra hoo, so you are hitting your energy deep. Your energy starts moving upwards; your body has become flexible, liquid, vaporous, jumping, a dance; and constantly your eyes are static towards me, staring towards me, fixed to-wards me, and I can work on your highest center.
The whole situation is created: your energy moving, hoo constantly hitting at the source – the lowest source of energy – forcing it to move upwards, you jumping, your eyes staring, mind in a stop, and me constantly working on your sahasrar.
I will be moving my hands just to give you hints. When I move my hands like this you have to go completely mad and become dynamic; just a dance, the dancer is lost. And sometimes, as I move my hands upwards, you have to bring more and more energy to movement. You don’t know how much energy you have got; you are holding it. Don’t be a miser, allow it. Let it flow, let your totality come into it.
Then there will be some moments when I will put my palms downwards. When I put my palms downwards that shows that now you are in such a vaporous state that a contact can be made. Now I can come to you, now I can touch your sahasrar. So when I put my palms downwards you have to bring all energy, whatsoever there is, to become the dance, the jump, the hoo. Bring your total energy in that moment, because in that moment a contact is possible, a shaktipat is possible.
And you will feel…if you really move with me you will feel the lotus in the head flowering. You will feel the silence that comes through it, the bliss that comes through it. You will feel the perfume that happens within through its flowering. Once this flower starts flowering you can never be the same again. Now you are on the path, now nothing can stop you. Now you can move alone, no master is needed.
A master is needed only up to that point when your budlike sahasrar opens. Once the master has helped you to open it, once the petals have started opening, you can be alone. Now no one is needed, now you have gone beyond all possibilities of falling. You can rise and only rise now, there is no possibility of any fall. You have come to the point which is called by Buddha the point of no return. Only up to that point is a master needed.
These will be the meditations that we will follow. I thought it would be good if I told you about everything so there would be no need again to talk about them.
Now the first sutra. It is an invocation.
Aum, may my speech be rooted in my mind, and my mind rooted in my speech. O self-illumined Brahman, be manifest unto me. Speech and mind form the basis of my knowledge, so please do not undo my pursuit of knowledge. Day and night I spend in this pursuit. I shall speak the law; I shall speak the truth. May Brahman protect me; may he protect the speaker, protect the speaker. Aum, shanti, shanti, shanti.
We are not alone, and no one is an island. Existence is one. So when you are seeking you need the help of the whole. Just the attitude of asking for the help becomes the help; just the attitude to invoke, to call the whole, the center of the whole existence to help you, becomes the help. There is no one to give you help, there is no person.
Whenever the Upanishads invoke, they are not invoking any personal god – there is none. Then to whom is their invocation addressed? It is not addressed to anyone; really it is not addressed at all. Then why call it an invocation? Then why start with it? There is something totally different.
Upanishadic rishis feel and know that every ego exists in conflict, struggle. You exist as your ego because you go on fighting. The more you fight, the more you are; the more you are in conflict and struggle, the more the ego is strengthened. This effort to know the ultimate cannot be ego-based. It can only be an egoless effort.
This invocation is just for the seeker, for the rishi himself. It is an effort to drop the struggle, the conflict, the violent resistance which we are having every moment with existence. This invocation is just to say, “I will not swim in the river; now I will flow, float. I will not fight with the river of existence, I will just allow the river to take me wherever it leads.” This is a surrender, and this surrender is very very significant.
Unless you surrender there is no possibility – because you are the disease. The very concept that “I am” is the problem. Every ‘I’ is false, because I cannot exist without existence. If I cannot exist without existence, what is the meaning of calling myself ‘I’?
The Upanishads say, “If God is there, only he can call himself ‘I’, nobody else.” But he has never called himself, he has not asserted anything. There is no one to whom to assert. There is no thou, so how can he say ‘I’? He is only. This invocation is just to say, “I am not struggling against you, I’m ready to flow with you. I will become the river.”
Aum. That’s why no name – Allah, Ram, Yahweh – no name has been used, just aum. The Upanishads say that aum is the very structure of this existence. When you are totally silent and the mind has dissolved and the thoughts disappeared, when the ego has ceased, then you hear the sound of aum – it is a soundless sound. No one is creating it, it is there. It is the very existential sound; it is how existence happens to be – just a humming sound of existence. Existence is there, alive – that aliveness creates a sound; or, to that aliveness a sound happens. That sound is not created by anybody; it is uncreated, anahat.
If you have heard about Zen masters…they go on telling their disciples to go and meditate, meditate on the sound of one hand clapping. We can create a sound by clapping two hands. Zen masters say to their disciples, “Go and find out that sound which comes out of only one hand: the clapping of one hand, not with anything else.”
We know this is absurd. A sound can come only with conflict, with two things clashing. Two hands can create sound, not one hand. Zen masters also know that, but still they have been giving this meditation for centuries. From Buddha up to now, Zen masters go on giving it. They know, their disciples know, that this is absurd. Then what is the significance? One has to watch, meditate, and move towards a sound which is already there, which is not created. That is the meaning of the sound of one hand.

I have heard a story. A small boy, just ten or twelve years of age, lived in a Zen monastery. Every day he would see many seekers coming to the master to ask for help, methods, techniques, guidance. He also became attracted, so one day he also came in the morning in the same way a seeker comes to a Zen master. With deep reverence he bowed down seven times. The master started laughing: “What has happened to this boy?”
And then he sat in the way seekers should sit before a Zen master. Then he waited, as seekers should wait, for the master to ask, “Why have you come?”
The master asked, “Toyo” – Toyo was the name of the boy – “why have you come?”
So Toyo bowed down and said, “Master, I have come in search of truth. What shall I do? How should I practice?”
The master knew that this boy was simply imitating, because everybody he heard came and asked the same questions, so just jokingly the master said, “Toyo, you go and meditate. Two hands clapping can create a sound. What is the sound of one hand clapping?”
Toyo bowed down seven times again, went back to his room, started meditating. He heard a geisha girl singing, so he said, “Right, this is the thing.” He came immediately, bowed down.
The master was laughing. He said, “Did you meditate, Toyo?”
He said, “Yes sir, and I have found it: it is like a geisha girl singing.”
The master said, “No, this is wrong. Go again, meditate.”
So he went again, meditated for three days. Then he heard the sound of water dripping, so he said, “Right now, this is the thing – I have got it.” He came again, the master asked…he said, “The sound of the water dripping.”
The master said, “Toyo, that too is not it. You go and meditate.”
So he meditated for three months. Then he heard locusts in the trees, so he said, “Yes, I have got it.” He came again.
The master said, “No, this too is not right.”
And so on and on. One year passed. Then for one year continuously he was not seen. The master became anxious: “What happened to the boy? He has not come.” So he went to find him. He was sitting under a tree, silent, his body vibrating to some unknown sound; his body dancing, a very gentle dance, as if just moving with the breeze.
The master didn’t like to disturb the boy, so he sat there waiting. Hours and hours passed. When the sun was setting and it was evening, the master said, “Toyo?”
The boy opened his eyes and he said, “This is it.”
The master said, “Yes, you have got it!”

This aum is that sound. When all sounds disappear from the mind, then you hear a sound. The Upanishads have made that sound the symbol of the whole, because whenever the whole happens to the part, it happens in that music of aum, in that harmony of aum.
Aum, may my speech be rooted in my mind, and my mind rooted in my speech.
The master is saying, “O ultimate, the whole, the total, aum, help me so that my speech is rooted in my mind.” A master should not speak of anything that is not deeply rooted in his mind, in his experience; that which he has not known he should not speak of. He should only speak of that which he has known, for which he can stand the witness, for which he can say, “I am the witness” – only that.
May my speech be rooted in my mind – in my experience. Mind is your experience, the way you have experienced the world, the existence. The master says: May my speech be rooted in my mind, and my mind rooted in my speech. And whatsoever I say, I should not only say it, I must flow through it. Not only should my words relate, through my words I must move; my consciousness must use words as vehicles.
Ordinarily we use words without moving with them, even such beautiful words as love. We go on saying to people, “I love you,” not meaning it at all. You may not even be aware of what you are saying. If you were aware, you would be very guarded. How can you say such a sacred word, love, so easily? You go on saying, “I love my car, I love my dog, I love my wife.” You can love anything – even chocolate, ice cream. Your love is not rooted anywhere, you are not moving in it. How can a man love ice cream? And if you can love ice cream, then whenever you say, “I love,” it is not reliable. Then don’t say “I love” to any person, because no person would like to become like ice cream or chocolate.
But we go on using words not to express something, but on the contrary, to hide something. Just watch: when you say to someone, “I love you,” you may be just hiding hate. It was so bubbling you were afraid the other may come to know it; immediately you have to hide it. You say, “I love you.” This must be some type of screen, some form of hiding, suppression.
The master says:
Aum, may my speech be rooted in my mind, and my mind rooted in my speech.
Whatsoever I say, I must move in it, otherwise I should not say it. And whatsoever is said must be my experience, I should not say it on anybody else’s authority. The Vedas say, The Bible says, the Koran says – they may be saying, but that’s useless unless I know. They cannot be authorities; only my own experience can be the authority. If I know, they can be witnesses to my knowledge. Then I can say, “The Koran also says this.” But the Koran is not right because it is the Koran; it is right because it is my experience, and the Koran supports it. I remain, my own experience remains, the center.
O self-illumined Brahman, be manifest unto me.
Very paradoxical….
O self-illumined Brahman, be manifest unto me.
Brahman is self-illumined, he doesn’t need any other source of illumination. We are here; if the light is put off we cannot see each other. We are not self-illumined, the light is needed. If light is not there we are in darkness. But Brahman, the total, is self-illumined – no other light is needed.
The rishi says:
O self-illumined Brahman, be manifest unto me.
And then he says, “You are self-illumined; no light is needed to know you. You are self-evident; no proof is needed to prove you. Still, I am ignorant, my eyes are closed, I am finite. Because of my finiteness, because of my eyes, I cannot see you who are self-illumined. Be manifest unto me.” This must be the attitude – a humble, receptive attitude.
Speech and mind form the basis of my knowledge, so please do not undo my pursuit of knowledge. Day and night I spend in this pursuit.
The rishi says, “Mind, thinking, are my means and methods, so don’t undo my pursuit of knowledge. I don’t have anything else; I have only the mind.” And the rishi knows that the mind cannot be the right source of knowing the Brahman, but that is the only source you have. You can know the ultimate only when the mind is no more. But right now you have just the mind and nothing else.
So the rishi says, “Help me. I have nothing else, only this mind. And I know well that this mind cannot lead to you, but that’s all I have got. So help me, and don’t undo my efforts. Just because through mind you cannot be known, don’t undo my efforts. My mind will lead me to a point where it itself becomes the no-mind. But wait and don’t undo my efforts.”
It is just like a child who says, “I have got legs to walk, but they are weak, unaccustomed – I have never walked before. I have only got these small, weak, unadjusted, yet-to-be-adjusted legs, and I have to walk with them. Don’t undo my efforts. A moment will come when this weakness will disappear, so be patient with me.”
That’s what the rishi is saying to the universe: “Be patient with me. I may commit many errors, mistakes. I may move on a wrong path, but be patient with me.”
I shall speak the law; I shall speak the truth. May Brahman protect me; may he protect the speaker. Aum, shanti, shanti, shanti.
Before the rishi starts his discourse, the Upanishad we will be discussing in these days, he says, “I shall only speak the law. I will not speak any creed, any theory. I will not talk about any doctrine. I will talk only about the law, that which is.”
There are temptations to create theories, there are temptations to create systems. And it always happens that whenever a man finds a fragment of truth, immediately around that fragment he creates a system. The whole system is speculation.
This Upanishadic seer says, “I shall only speak the law, whatsoever it is, and I will not add anything to it. I shall only speak the truth. Whatsoever the consequence, whatsoever the result, wheresoever it leads, I will only speak the truth. But I am weak, so protect me, O Brahman.”
May he protect the speaker…may he protect the speaker
Twice he repeats – the fear is there. Whenever one starts speaking, the fear is there that mind may tempt, mind may add something, distort the truth or create something which is untrue, or substitute something which is not there.
When one English poet, Coleridge, died, he left thousands of poems incomplete. Just before he died somebody asked him, “Why have you not completed them?” A few poems were missing only one line, so they said, “Why don’t you complete them? – they will become masterpieces. Just because of one line…. Why can’t you add one line to them?”
Coleridge is reported to have said, “I cannot do that. I have taken a vow that I will not add anything. These lines have descended to me, I have not done anything. In a moment of ecstasy they have been revealed to me; I have noted them down. I am simply a vehicle, not the creator; a medium, an adjunct – so I have noted down. The last line has not come yet and I am waiting, I cannot do anything. If it comes it comes, if it doesn’t come, nothing can be done. I am helpless.”
This is the attitude of the right seeker – he will not add anything, because a fragment of truth will become a lie if you add something to complete it. And the whole truth is not known, and cannot be known. Only fragments are known. The whole cannot be known. The whole is so vast; only glimpses are known. So the mind is tempted to create a system; the system becomes false. Hegel, Kant, Plato, Aristotle – they all had a few fragments of truth, but they destroyed them because they created vast edifices around them. And the fragrance is lost, you cannot find where it is.
These Upanishadic seers are different, their attitude absolutely different. They have not systematized whatsoever they have asserted. The Upanishads are unsystematized fragments, just fragments – no system, no logic, no reason. Whatsoever is revealed, they have noted it down. So the master says:
I shall speak only the law; I shall speak only the truth. May Brahman protect me…the speaker…may Brahman protect the speaker.
Aum, shanti, shanti, shanti.

============================================================

The sage Sankriti once visited Adityalok, the abode of the sun god,
and bowing to him he worshipped him with what is known as
chakshusmati vidya.

Aum, salutation to the sun god who illumines the organ of vision!
Salutation to the sun who is a great warrior!
Salutation to the sun who represents the three conditionings:
tamas, rajas and sattva (dark, red and white)!
O Lord, from untruth lead me to truth, from darkness lead me to light,
and from death lead me to the eternal. Salutation to the sun,
the son of Aditi, who is the light in our eyes.
And we dedicate all that we have to the sun who rules the universe.

Much pleased with being worshipped with chakshusmati vidya,
the sun god said:
A Brahmin who recites this vidya – knowledge – every day will not suffer from eye diseases, nor will anyone in his family ever be struck blind.
The power of this vidya is obtained if it is taught to eight Brahmins,
and knowing it one achieves greatness.
Man is blind. He cannot see that which is. We have eyes, but we can see through them only that which is illusory. Only the appearance is seen, not the real – the real is missed. That’s why those who have known have called man blind.
Jesus goes on saying to his disciples, “If you have eyes, look; if you have ears, then listen.” Of course, his disciples were not blind, nor were they deaf. They were as with eyes as we are, they had all the senses we have got. Then he must be referring to some other eyes, to some other senses.
These eyes which can look only outwards, which can only look into the without, are blind unless they also become capable of seeing within. If you cannot see yourself you are blind, and one who cannot see himself, what else can he see? And whatsoever he sees, whatsoever his knowledge, it remains based on a deep blindness. Unless you become self-seeing, unless you turn within, unless you can have a look at the reality that you are, whatsoever you encounter in the world is going to be just the appearance. The same will be the proportion: the more you penetrate within the more you can penetrate without, because reality is one.
If you are not acquainted with yourself, all your acquaintance, all your knowledge is just false. Without self-knowledge there is no possibility of any knowledge. You can go on knowing and knowing; you can go on collecting more and more information, but that information will remain information – dead, borrowed. It will never become a knowing eye.
How to attain those eyes which can penetrate the illusory and can encounter the real? This is going to be the base of this whole Upanishad. In the old days it was called chakshusmati vidya, the wisdom through which eyes are attained. But the first thing to be constantly remembered is that as we are, we are blind; as we are, we are dead; as we are, we are illusory, the stuff dreams are made of.
Why cannot our eyes see the real? They are so much filled with dreams, so much filled with thoughts, that whatsoever you see, you are not seeing that which is; you project your ideas, your thoughts, your dreams upon it. The whole world becomes just a projection screen, and you go on projecting things. Whatsoever you see outside, you have put it there. You live in a man-created world, and everyone lives in his own world. That world consists of his own projections.
Unless your eyes are completely vacant, unless there is no content within your eyes, no thoughts, no clouds; unless you become mirrorlike, pure, innocent, contentless, you cannot encounter the real. The real can be seen only through naked, empty eyes; it cannot be seen through filled eyes.
This is all the art or the science of meditation consists of: how to make your eyes mirrorlike, nonprojecting – just looking at that which is, not creating it, not imagining it, not adding anything to it…just encountering it as it is. You never see things as they are, you always see through your mind; you color them.
A girl looks beautiful to you or a man looks beautiful. The same man or the same woman was not beautiful a day before, and the same man or the same woman may not be beautiful again. So what happened? How does a person suddenly become beautiful? And your whole logic is illogical. You say, “l love this person because this person is beautiful.” The contrary is the case: this person becomes beautiful because you love. The beauty is not the cause but a side-effect.
When you are in love with someone the person becomes beautiful. To others that same person may not be beautiful, and to others the same person may even be ugly. To you also the same person was not beautiful before, and later on the same person can become ugly – to you also. But at this moment, in this mood of love, you project something on the person. You project your dreams, the person becomes just a screen. The whole beauty is put there by you. It is you who create the beautiful face, the beautiful face is your interpretation. It is not the real, because the reality is neither ugly nor beautiful.
If man disappears from this earth what will happen? Will the hills be beautiful, the flowers beautiful, the thorns ugly? – what will happen? With the disappearance of man, beauty and ugliness will disappear. The earth will be there as it is. The sun will rise and the moon will be there in the night, and the sky will be filled every day with stars. Flowers will flower, trees will bloom, the hills will be as they are. Everything will be as it is, but there will be no beauty and no ugliness.
With the disappearance of man all his interpretations disappear. The reality is neither beautiful nor ugly – it is there. You interpret it according to yourself. That’s why a certain thing can be beautiful in China and may not be beautiful in India. A certain type of face is beautiful in Africa, it may not be beautiful in England.
When for the first time Christian missionaries came to Africa, they were in a great difficulty. The Bible was to be translated, and God is always depicted as white and the Devil as black. So it was a problem – how to tell the black people that the Devil is black and God is white? They could conceive of God as black and the Devil as white. And that was natural, they had always depicted their God as black; their Devil had always been white. You may not be aware of what the Christian missionaries had to do. In African translations of The Bible, God is depicted as black and the Devil as white; otherwise there could be no communication, no possibility of any meeting.
We conceive of things through our mind; that mind goes on interpreting. But we can understand about beauty and ugliness – what about other interpretations? If man disappears there will be no good and evil in the world, nothing will be moral and nothing will be immoral. All our morality, all our judgment is through conceptions.
A lion jumping on an animal and eating it, tearing it – is he bad or good? Is he evil? If we interpret then it looks very evil, violent. But the lion is not doing anything, he is simply eating. He is not aware of anything – of what is good and what is bad. And he is not doing anything bad; he is taking his lunch, as you take your lunch. If man disappears, then there is nothing good and nothing bad.
And the same happens to the sage. When a man becomes enlightened the man has disappeared from him with all the interpretations, judgments. He has become pure, as if he is no more. The mind has been dropped. He is conscious, fully conscious, but with no contents to project. He looks at the world as it is, without any interpretation. And for the first time he comes to know reality.
Man cannot know the real because man goes on projecting his ideology; and all ideologies are home-made, the existence doesn’t support them, you create them. That’s why it is said again and again, all over the world – Eckhart says it in the West, Boehme says it in the West, Rinzai says it in Japan, Lin Chi says it in China, Buddha says it in India – all over the world, wherever a mirrorlike mind has appeared, it has said that nothing is bad and nothing is good. There is no evil and no God – existence is one. And if you can accept this existence without any interpretation, for the first time you are creating a way which can lead to the truth.
You cannot carry your mind to the truth. If you carry your mind, whatsoever you come to know will not be the truth. You may encounter the truth but you will not know it, because the moment you see something you have interpreted. You pass through a garden and you see roseflowers. You have not seen them and immediately the mind says, “Beautiful.” The flowers have disappeared, your concept has come in. You have projected, you have judged. Jesus says, “Judge ye not.” Don’t judge.

I have heard about one Mohammedan Sufi mystic. He used to sell small things in the village, and the people of that village became aware that he had no judgment. So they would take the things and give him false coins. He would accept them, because he would never say, “This is wrong and this is right.” Sometimes they would take things from him and they would say, “We have paid,” and he would not say, “You have not paid.” He would say, “Okay.” He would thank them.
Then from other villages also people started coming. This man was very good; you could take anything from his shop, you need not pay, or you could pay in false coins, and he accepted everything!
Then death came near to this old man. These were his last words: he looked at the sky and said, “Allah, God, I have been accepting all kinds of coins, false ones also. I am also a false coin – don’t judge me. I have not judged your people, please don’t judge me.” And it is said that how can God judge such a person?

Jesus says, “Judge ye not, so ye may not be judged.”
If judgment disappears, you have become innocent. If you don’t divide things into good and bad, ugly and beautiful, acceptable and nonacceptable; if you don’t divide things, if you look at reality without any division, your eyes will come into existence for the first time. This is chakshusmati vidya, the signs of gaining eyes.
If you divide you will remain blind, if you judge you will remain blind, if you say this is bad and this is good, you will persist in your blindness…because existence knows nothing. There is nothing good and nothing bad – existence accepts everything. And when you also accept everything you have become existence-like. You have become one with it.
So remember, morality is not religion. Rather, on the contrary, morality is one of the hindrances in gaining religion, just like immorality. Morality, immorality – both are hindrances. When you transcend both you have transcended the mind, the dual, the dualistic attitude. Then the sage and the sinner have become one. Then you remain in your self, you don’t move to judge. And when you don’t judge, your mind cannot project: the mind projects through judgment.

You may have heard this story, so famous, but Christianity goes on missing the meaning of it. In a village a crowd came to Jesus, and they had brought a woman who had sinned in the eyes of the crowd. So they said to Jesus, “This woman is a sinner, and she has confessed. So what should we do now? It is written in the old scriptures that she should be killed by throwing stones at her, she should be stoned to death. What do you say? What should we do?”
They were trying to put Jesus in a dilemma, because if he said not to kill her…as it was expected he should say, because he was saying, “Love. And if someone strikes you on one cheek, give him the other cheek; if someone forces you to carry his burden for one mile, go two miles with him; if someone snatches your coat, give him your shirt also.” This man could not say, “Kill, murder, stone this woman to death.” And if he said, “No, don’t kill her,” then they could say, “You are against the scriptures, so you cannot be a prophet. You don’t belong to us. You are a destroyer.”
But Jesus escaped their dilemma – because the dilemma exists only for the obsessed mind. When there is no mind dilemma disappears, because dilemma consists of division. You divide things in two, in opposites, and then there is the question, What to choose, how to choose? Then the problem arises. But if there is no mind, there is no question of choice – a choicelessness has happened.
So Jesus said, “It is right, it is written in the scriptures to stone this woman to death. It is okay. Bring the stones and kill this woman – but only that man is allowed to stone this woman who has himself not committed sin in his actions, or in his mind.”
Then those who were leading the crowd started dispersing, because there was none who had not committed adultery in act or in mind. And there is no difference whether you commit it in action or you commit it in the mind, it is the same for the consciousness. There is no difference. Whether you think of killing a person or you actually kill, there is no difference, because you have killed inwardly when you have thought. If, just in your mind, you want to rape a woman, you have raped. Your whole being has done it. Whether it has become actual in the world of events or not, that is irrelevant, that is secondary. As far as you are concerned the sin has been committed.
Nobody could throw a stone at that woman. The crowd disappeared, only the woman was left. So the woman said to Jesus, “But I have committed…I have done a wrong. I am immoral. So whether the crowd is going to stone me to death or not, you can punish me. I confess.”
Jesus said, “Who am I to judge? It is between you and your God, you and the ultimate, you and the all – who am I to judge? It is something between you and existence. Where do I come in?”

This is the mind of the sage, the no-mind of the sage. He cannot divide, so he cannot judge; he cannot say this is good and this is bad. Only this type of consciousness can attain eyes – eyes that can see penetrate into the real.
Now we will enter the sutra.
The sage Sankriti once visited Adityalok, the abode of the sun god, and bowing to him he worshipped him with what is known as chakshusmati vidya.Aum, salutation to the sun god, who illumines the organ of vision! Salutation to the sun who is the great warrior! Salutation to the sun who represents the three conditionings: tamas, rajas and sattva!
A person is called a sage who has become choiceless; a sage means one who cannot judge. A sage in India is not the same as he is in the West. In the West they have been doing many absurd things. One of them, the peak of foolishness, has been this: the pope gives sainthood to people. It is like a certificate or a degree. The pope has to declare that a certain person has become a sage. The council of bishops has to agree, confirm it. So it’s just like a university giving a doctorate – LL.D or D.Litt. or something.
So sometimes this has happened, as it happened with Joan of Arc. She was killed, murdered, burned; and she was burned because of the pope, because of the church. They thought she was against Christianity. Then later on the judgment was changed, later on other popes found that the pope who condemned her was wrong. So later on when she was dead, posthumously she was awarded sainthood, she was made a saint. She became Saint Joan of Arc.
But what to do with the man who had condemned her? What to do with the bishop who was solely responsible for her burning and murder, who had proposed to the pope that she should be condemned? He was dead, so what was to be done with him? So his bones were taken out of the grave, out of the town, and they were beaten, insulted, thrown to the dogs. Now Joan became a saint by the decree of the pope.
In the East this looks like the peak of foolishness, the climax of foolishness. Nobody can make a man a sage – nobody, no judge. This is not something like a degree to be given by somebody else; it is an inner achievement, an inner realization. It doesn’t depend on anybody else. A sage is a person who has become enlightened. Now he has no choices. For him nothing is bad and nothing is good. He has become natural. He is, just like a tree or like a hill, like a river or like the ocean. He has no mind to say anything, to interpret. He doesn’t divide.

It is said of one Zen master, one Zen sage…. He lived in a small hut three or four miles outside a village. One night he found that a thief had entered his hut. He was very much disturbed, because there was nothing in the house, and this thief had traveled for three or four miles in the night and he would have to go back empty handed. The sage started weeping and crying. The thief also became concerned. He said, “What has happened? Why are you crying so much? Are you disturbed that I may take something from your hut?”
The sage said, “No, that is not the thing, I am disturbed because there is nothing here. At least you could have been a little more gentlemanly, you could have informed me before; I would have arranged something for you to steal. There is nothing – what will you think of me? And this is such an honor, that you traveled three or four miles in this night, this cold night, to come to my hut. No one has given such an honor to me before. I am just a beggar and you have made me a king, just by the idea that something can be stolen from me. And there is nothing, so I am crying. So what should I do now? You can take my blanket.”
He had only one blanket, otherwise he was naked, just under his blanket he was naked. And the night was very cold. He said to the thief, “Please have some compassion on me and don’t say no, because I have nothing else to give to you. Take this blanket, and whenever you again think of visiting, just send a hint. I am poor, but still I will arrange something.”
The thief could not understand what was happening, but he saw the man crying and weeping so he took compassion on him; he couldn’t say no. He took the blanket and disappeared. And that night this Zen monk wrote a small haiku, in which he said…he was sitting still at his window, the night was cool, cold, the full moon was in the sky, and he says in his haiku:
God
if I could give this moon
to that thief….
This is the mind of a sage, or, the no-mind. With this same sage, again a thief happened to come to his hut. He was writing a letter, so he looked at the thief and said, “For what have you come? What do you want?”
And this sage was so innocent that even the thief couldn’t tell a lie. So he said, “Looking at you, so mirrorlike, so innocent like a child, I cannot tell a lie. Should I tell the truth?”
The sage said, “Yes.”
He said, “I have come to steal something.”
The sage said, “There in that corner I have got a few rupees. You can take them” – and then he started to write his letter again.
The thief took the money, was trying to go out, and then the sage said, “Stop! When somebody gives you something you should thank him. The money may not be of much help, but thanking a person will go a long way and will be of help to you. So thank me!” The thief thanked him and disappeared into the dark.
Later on the thief was caught, and it was discovered that he had been to this sage’s hut also, so the sage was called to the court. The sage said, “Yes, I know this man very well – but he has never stolen anything from me. I gave him some rupees and he thanked me for them. It is finished, it was nothing wrong. The whole thing is finished, the account is closed. I gave him some money and he thanked me for it. He is not a thief.”
This mind, or no-mind, of a sage is the base.
The sage Sankriti once visited Adityalok.
This is a parable. Adityalok means the abode of the sun or the abode of light, enlightenment. The sun is just a symbol. The sun is not only a life-giving source, it is a light-giving source also. So the sun is symbolic. Sankriti, a sage, visited the abode of the sun.
It means that only sages can visit the abode of light. We remain in darkness, we remain in dark nights – not because there is night all around, but because our eyes are closed. Filled with so many projections, we cannot see the light all around. The light is there, the abode is everywhere. You need not go to visit the sun – the sun reaches everywhere. To every nook and corner of the earth the sun reaches, but only one who has become a sage can enter into its abode.
The sage Sankriti once visited Adityalok, the abode of the sun god, and bowing to him he worshipped him with what is known as chakshusmati vidya.
He bowed down to the sun and worshipped him, and this worship was done by the science of attaining real eyes. This is beautiful, because this is the only way you can worship light. The only way to worship light is to attain eyes; the worship is finished. If you can look at the light without any projection, this is the worship. If you project, you have changed the light into darkness. You are behaving like a blind man.
No other worship is needed. There is no need to go and kneel down on the earth and say a prayer to the sun. That is useless. The only worship is to attain those eyes which can see light. So the sage, Sankriti, worshipped the sun, bowing down to him with what is known as chakshusmati vidya. If you attain those eyes which can see the real you have become a worshipper, and only that worship can be accepted by existence, no other.
Your prayers are nothing but demands, your prayers are nothing but childish, foolish demands. They are of no use. You cannot persuade existence to move according to you. But go to the churches, to the temples – what are people doing there? They think they are worshipping, praying, meditating. They are not doing anything like that. They are just persuading the divine power to follow them, to do whatsoever they desire, to be according to them. They are giving advice. They know more than the divine; they know more what is to be done than the divine knows, so they have come just to give some advice.
They are trying to persuade, but there is no way to persuade the whole, be-cause the whole always knows more than the part. And the whole cannot follow the part, the part has to follow the whole. The whole cannot follow you. And it is good that it doesn’t follow you, otherwise you would create a chaos – you don’t know what you are asking.

You may have heard this story. Once it happened that a man was worshipping Shiva. He worshipped and worshipped, prayed and prayed for years. Then Shiva appeared and he said, “You can ask for three blessings, three gifts; three boons can be given to you.”
The man had been worshipping for so long that he really had forgotten why he had started. His mind was so constantly changing. The worship had become an obsession. He had forgotten for what, so he said, “Let me think.”
Then he asked for one gift. The gift was given. Then he became aware that this wouldn’t do; he had asked for something wrong. He was angry with his wife, so he had said, “Kill her!” Immediately she was dead. And this can happen to any husband or any wife. They are fighting, filled with hate. But hate is also not total, there is love also. Mind is divided: you love the person and you hate the same person. It is always fifty-fifty. He asked that the wife should be killed, and the wife was dead; immediately she fell down. The moment she was dead he became aware that he loved her very much, so he said, “Please, revive her again.” So the second gift was wasted. Two gifts wasted: first she was killed, second she was revived – only one was left. Then he said, “Now, give me time enough to think; otherwise I will again make a mistake, and then there is no fourth.”
Shiva waited and waited. Years passed and he would come again and again and he would ask, “Now you ask for the third.”
The man was so puzzled he couldn’t sleep. He became almost insane just thinking about the one wish, because only one was left. He went visiting all the persons he knew who were wise, and they suggested many things, but nothing seemed worthwhile. Then he asked Shiva himself. “You tell me. I am going mad!”
And what Shiva told him is to be remembered. He said, “There can be only one wish, one desire which is worthwhile. Ask for desirelessness, otherwise nothing is worthwhile. Whatsoever you ask, the next moment you will want something else, even just the opposite of the first.”

The mind is divided; our prayers are through that divided mind. A sage is a person who has become undivided. He cannot pray; his prayer is not through words, his prayer is through his being. The way he is, is his worship. So when this sage, Sankriti, looked at the sun, the god, the god of light, the very look, the way he looked, was his worship. The way he was, was his prayer. Those pure eyes, with no dreams, no clouds, no tears, no demands, not asking anything; just simple, innocent, childlike, just looking at the god – that was the worship.
O Lord, from untruth lead me to truth.
And when the sun god was happy and was ready to bless him, this was his wish.
O Lord, from untruth lead me to truth; from darkness lead me to light; and from death lead me to the eternal.
This is what every seeker is asking: From untruth lead me to truth, from darkness lead me to light, and from death to deathlessness. This is all that everyone is seeking.
The sun god is holy; he is without parallel. The sun god holds all manifestations, and is adorned with a garland of constellations. He is all fire, luminous like gold, effulgent and hot. With a thousand rays and presenting himself in a hundred ways, this sun makes itself manifest to all creatures. Salutation to the sun, the son of Aditi, who is the light in our eyes. We dedicate all that we have to the sun who rules the universe.

Much pleased with being worshipped with chakshusmati vidya the sun god said: A Brahmin who recites this vidya – knowledge – every day, will not suffer from eye diseases, nor will anyone in his family ever be struck blind. The power of this vidya is obtained if it is taught to eight Brahmins, and knowing it one achieves greatness.
Many inner meanings have to be understood. That which is to be said is said through a parable. Don’t be much concerned with the parable, don’t be much concerned with the words that have been used. Rather be concerned with the significance, the inner meaning.
Much pleased with being worshipped with…the science of real eyes….
Existence is pleased with you when you are real. When you are unreal existence is not pleased with you. Not that there is someone who is pleased and unpleased. The way existence behaves is like any natural law, for example gravitation. If you walk in a balanced way gravitation is pleased with you, the gravitation will not be destructive to you. But if you lose balance you will fall down on the earth. You may become crippled for your whole life, you may break your bones. Gravitation is unpleased with you, not pleased with you. But there is nobody deciding – this is a natural law. If you follow the law you will be happy, if you don’t follow the law you will be unhappy.
This is what in the East has been called the law of karma, the law of action. If your action follows the ultimate law, you will be attaining more and more bliss. If you go against it, immediately you will fall into suffering. There is no one like a grand manager deciding everybody’s actions, who is doing wrong and who is doing good, and who is to be sent to the heaven and who is to be thrown into hell – there is no one. With every movement you create your heaven and your hell. If you follow the ultimate law, you are creating heaven for yourself moment to moment. If you go astray, if you go against the law, you are creating hell, not the law.
This is just a way of saying that the god was pleased. Why was he pleased? He was pleased because this man, Sankriti, this sage, Sankriti, had the real eyes to look with. He had become pure, innocent. His eyes were vacant of all theories, doctrines, scriptures. He was not projecting anything from his eyes. He was simply absorbing. His eyes were used to look, not to interpret.
Much pleased with being worshipped with chakshusmati vidya, the sun god said: A Brahmin who recites this vidya every day, will not suffer from eye diseases.
We are all suffering from eye diseases. This is just symbolic. Not that we use specs – those eyes are not what is meant. Even a blind man suffers from eye diseases and he has no eyes. These eyes, these visible eyes are not what is meant.
The world that we create around us is created through our eye diseases. We go on looking wrongly, we go on dividing. The universe is one, but our eyes go on dividing. That division is the disease. The existence is just as it is. We go on condemning or appreciating, that is the eye disease. We go on judging. Facts are just facts, there is no way to judge.

One Zen monk, Bokuju, was passing through a street in a village. Somebody came and struck him with a stick. He fell down, and with him, the stick also. He got up and picked up the stick. The man who had hit him was running away. Bokuju ran after him, calling, “Wait, take your stick with you!” He followed after him and gave him the stick. A crowd had gathered to see what was happening, and somebody asked Bokuju, “That man struck you hard, and you have not said anything!”
Bokuju is reported to have said, “A fact is a fact. He has hit, that’s all. It happened that he was the hitter and I was the hit. It is just as if I am passing under a tree, or sitting under a tree, and a branch falls down. What will I do? What can I do?”
But the crowd said, “But a branch is a branch, this is a man. We cannot say anything to the branch, we cannot punish it. We cannot say to the tree that it is bad, because a tree is a tree, it has no mind.”
Bokuju said, “This man to me is also just a branch. And if I cannot say anything to the tree, why should I bother to say anything to this man? It happened. I am not going to interpret what has happened. And it has already happened. Why get worried about it? It is finished, over.”

This is the mind of a sage – not choosing, not asking, not saying this should be and this should not be. Whatsoever happens, he accepts it in its totality. This acceptance gives him freedom, this acceptance gives him the capacity to see. These are eye diseases: shoulds, should nots, divisions, judgments, condemnations, appreciations.
A Brahmin who recites this vidya every day….
Recites means lives. Through his whole being the recitation continues, through his whole being he is just a looker, not a judger. His eyes are just working like a mirror, whatsoever comes before them is mirrored. The moment it passes the mirror is again vacant. It does not cling; it does not think about the past, it does not look into the future.
The mirror remains in the present – whatsoever passes is mirrored. When it has gone the mirror is vacant again, nothing is left. You cannot destroy its mirrorlike innocence. This is the recitation. The whole day, moment to moment, one who lives this vidya, this knowledge, this seeing, will never suffer from eye diseases.
…Nor will anyone in his family ever be struck blind.
By family, the natural family is not meant. When a master is there his disciples are his family, not his sons and daughters. That has been called kul, the family. In the East, particularly in India, the house of the master, his ashram, was called gurukul – the family of the master. His disciples were really his descendants.
And if a master lives constantly seeing mirrorlike, his disciples will never be blind; blindness will never strike his family – those who belong to him in spirit, not in body. Ordinarily those who belong to you in body, they are your family, but for a master his family is those who belong to him in spirit. Those who belong to him in knowing, in discipline, in yoga, in sadhana, they are his family. And if a master lives constantly mirrorlike, the disciples are bound to be transformed just by his presence – even if they don’t do anything, even if they just sit by the side of the master.
The word upanishad is very meaningful. It means sitting by the side of the master. The word upanishad means just sitting in the presence of the master, not doing anything. It is not a question of doing, it is a question of being – absorbing the master. That’s what is meant in Christianity when Christ said, “Eat me. I will become your food.”
When you are near a master who is living this innermost science of being mirrorlike – mind has ceased, a simple consciousness, a flame – you can eat him, he can become your blood and bones. Nothing is to be done, you have simply to remain receptive in his presence – intimate, close, receptive, not fighting it, just open. He will flow, he will become a flow within you. He will come to you, he will fill you to the very deepest center. Just living with the master, not doing anything, just being in his presence, you are eating him. And he wants to be eaten, he wants to become the food.
But the food is very subtle. It is so subtle that if you are a little disturbed, judging, arguing, fighting in the mind, resisting, you will miss it. It is such a subtle music. You should be as if you are absent when you are in the presence of the master; as if you are not – just a passage so he can travel. He is not going to do it by his will – there is no will. If you are open he simply travels…that’s how it happens. If you are open he simply flows in you.
…Nor will anyone in his family ever be struck blind. The power of this vidya is obtained if it is taught to eight Brahmins, and knowing it one achieves greatness.
This is also to be understood. This is the secret of why a Buddha goes on trying for almost forty years, traveling from one village to another village seeking disciples; why Jesus is ready even to go to the cross; why Mahavira suffers so much – just to make contacts, to commune whatsoever he has attained.
A responsibility falls on you when you are enlightened, and that responsibility is not a duty enforced from without; it is something that is coming from within. When you become enlightened you have to share it. So it has never been otherwise; a person who has become enlightened, he has to share it. It is not a question of his decision to share or not. He has to share it, the very phenomenon is such that he has to give it to others. He has to find persons who can receive, who can eat him, for whom he can become food.
Buddha came to a village one evening. The whole village gathered, but he was waiting, as if for someone. Then somebody asked, “Why are you waiting? Everybody has come, now start your sermon.”
Buddha said, “The one for whom I have come is still absent. I will have to wait. You can hear me but you cannot listen. The person for whom I have come….”
They were very much disturbed, because all the respectable persons were present. All the rich were present; all the good, saintly, religious were present. For whom was he waiting? And then a girl came – a very ordinary, poor girl. She was coming back from her field. The moment she came, he started. So they asked, “You were waiting for this girl? We were not even aware that she lives in this village.”
Buddha is reported to have said, “In this village only she is receptive. For her I have traveled. She does not know much, she is not a scholar, she is not rich in any way. She is not respectable, she belongs to the untouchables, is poor, unknown, but she is receptive, and she has called me. Her receptivity is such that I became aware in the neighboring village that someone was calling me to flow. I have come to this village because of her.”
A disciple is one who is ready to receive, who can become like a womb, who is passive, open, vulnerable. And a master is one who is flowing, overflowing, dispersing his last body into the existence. And the best way is to become food for those who are seekers. This is Jesus’ sacrament. That is why the last thing he did on this earth was to call his disciples for the Last Supper. That is a symbol: before he leaves they should eat him totally.
The power of this vidya is obtained if it is taught to eight Brahmins….
But to find eight brahmins is very difficult. Eight brahmins means eight seekers – seekers of Brahman. It is very difficult; you have to go all around the world, then you can find eight. And even then it is not certain. Jesus had only twelve disciples.
Very few are there who are ready to receive; very few are there who are really in search; very few are there whose effort is authentic. Curious are many, but their curiosity is childlike, childish. They are curious about new things, but not authentically interested, not ready to do something, not ready to be transformed.
So the sun god says that the power of this vidya grows greater if you can share it with at least eight persons. A Buddha becomes more a Buddha, a Jesus becomes more a Christ the more he shares. This is the nature of bliss – the more you share it the more it grows. If you can share it with the whole existence it becomes the ultimate. But our minds are very miserly, we cannot share.

I have heard, once it happened: one man’s wife died in a Buddhist land, somewhere in China. The man called a Buddhist monk to pray for his wife who was dead now and had gone on a new journey – just to pray to protect her. The monk prayed, meditated, and then he said, “Everything will be good. Don’t you worry.”
The man asked, “But I heard you saying something like ‘for all the beings of the earth.’ You never mentioned my wife in particular. You were asking blessings, you were asking bliss for all the beings of the earth, but you were not mentioning my wife in particular. Mention her name in particular!”
The monk said, “It is difficult, because Buddha has said that whenever you ask for something, ask for all. It has to be shared with all. I cannot ask only for your wife. And if I ask only for your wife she will not get it. If I ask for all, only then is there a possibility.”
Then the man said, “Okay, but at least make one exception – just my neighbor. Exclude him! – and ask for everyone else. But at least make one exception. Exclude him, because I cannot bear this idea that he is also getting blessings of the divine.”

This miserliness, this mind of jealousy, hatred, cannot understand how to share. You never share anything. You may give something to somebody, but there is always a hidden bargain. Remember the difference. You can give many gifts to your husband, to your wife, to your friends, but they are deep bargains – you are expecting something to be returned. That is not sharing.
Sharing means you are never expecting anything in return, you are simply giving. You are not even expecting thankfulness.

It happened with Dozo, one Zen monk. A rich man came to Dozo with ten thousand gold coins. That is very much, a big amount. He was going to make that a gift for the temple where Dozo was the priest. Dozo accepted as if it was nothing. The man became disturbed. He said, “Do you know these are ten thousand gold coins?”
Dozo said, “You have said it so many times, I have heard it so many times. You have said it already too many times – do you think I am deaf?”
The man was just asking for thanks, only thanks, nothing more. Then he said, “Ten thousand golden coins is a big amount, even to me. I am a very rich man, but that amount is very big.”
Dozo said, “What do you want? What are you really asking? Are you asking for some gratitude? Are you asking that I should be thankful to you?”
The man said, “At least that much can be expected.”
So Dozo said, “Take your gold coins back. Or, if you want to give them to this temple, you will have to be thankful to me that I accepted.”
On the temple it is written even still…it is written that the giver should be thankful; only then is it a sharing. Somebody accepted your gift. This is such a great thing, because he could have rejected. Somebody accepted you through your gift. He could have rejected, there was no necessity to accept it. The giver should be thankful. Then it becomes a sharing, otherwise it is always a bargain. You are expecting something – something more valuable than you have given.
When someone becomes enlightened he can share, and he will do whatsoever he can just to share it.

============================================================

One friend has said that he is a devotee of Sai Baba, and therefore he is reluctant to call anyone else Bhagwan, but he wants my help, guidance. He says:
Osho,
I feel I have surrendered to Sai Baba, but still I feel the necessity of working with another teacher or guru. Is this possible?
The first thing is to remember that the master really does not work. He is there, his presence works, but the presence can work only if you have trust. If you don’t have trust, nothing can be done.
So really, if you feel you have surrendered to Sai Baba, what is the need to come to me? If the surrender has really happened, then asking for another master is futile. I doubt your surrender, your trust, because when trust has happened nothing more is needed. And if something more is needed, trust has not happened; you are still in search. If you cannot trust me, it is impossible to work. Not that I have any conditions, my door is open unconditionally, but it will remain closed to you because you can see it as open only when you have trust.
It is good if you feel an intimate closeness with Sai Baba, or anyone else. It is good. But then don’t wander here and there, then don’t go to anybody else, because this is impossible. Your trust remains with Sai Baba, then no one else can do anything; it is impossible. But you are not certain. You may be believing that surrender has happened. It has not happened, because then to ask for help from somebody else is just absurd. And if you ask for help, surrender will be needed. The reason is:
I cannot do anything positively.
I am available.
If you trust me then the contact is made.
It is just like this: light is there, but if you are sitting with closed eyes, the light cannot do anything in order for your eyes to open. Not that the light has any conditions for you. It is available, it is already there, it is already giving itself to you, but your eyes are closed. And if you say, “In this room I cannot open my eyes, because I have surrendered my eyes to some other room, to some other light,” then here you will have to remain in darkness. Not that light is not available, but you are not receptive.
If you have come here, that shows that you may believe you trust in Sai Baba but you don’t trust. You think you have surrendered, but your thinking is wrong, illusory. If you have surrendered then move to Sai Baba, open yourself to him so that he can work; then don’t go seeking here and there. I am ready to help, but for that you will have to be receptive. I cannot be aggressive to you, nobody can be. The very work is impossible with such aggression. If you trust me, something becomes possible. Then without any aggression the work starts. If you don’t trust, then I can only be violent to you, forcibly I have to open your eyes. That cannot be done. You cannot be forced into nirvana, you can only flow into it.
If you don’t trust my river, how can you flow with me? Then deep down you will be struggling; then you will be wasting your time, my time, and it is useless. So be clear about it. It may not only be the case with one man, it may be with many of you. Your heart belongs somewhere else? – then go there. Be wherever your heart is. If your heart is with me, only then is something possible; otherwise don’t waste your time and energy. This has to be understood clearly.
Your trust means that you are open. Your trust means that now you are ready to go into the unknown, into the uncharted. How can you move with me if you don’t trust me? And what you call me is insignificant to me, but not to you. Whether you call me Bhagwan or not, it is the same to me, but not the same to you, because your feeling will decide many things. If you cannot call anybody Bhagwan other than Sai Baba, then go to him, because then he is your temple, and only in his presence will you be transformed. And nothing is wrong in it.
But you have come here. That shows that the touch has not happened; you have not moved in deep, close intimacy. The relationship has not happened, the love has not happened. You can go on deceiving yourself. That will not be of much help. So be clear, analyze your own mind. If your heart is here, then there are possibilities. If your heart is not here, then go wherever your heart leads you.
I know you will have to come back, because you have been with Sai Baba, as you have said in this letter, and nothing has happened there. You are here, and I know that now you will move to some other teacher, and there you will say you have been with me and nothing has happened. And you are not here with me! Just physically being here doesn’t mean anything.
I know this must have been the case with Sai Baba also. You may have been there physically, as you are here, but it is not a question of physical presence, it is a question of inner opening. Then you may be on another planet and I can work. You are not needed to be here; space doesn’t mean anything, nor does time mean anything. You may be on another planet, you may be in another time, but if you are receptive you are here close to me. You may be just here, existing this very moment, but if your heart is not here then there is no possibility of any bridge.
There are many who go on wandering from one master to another. The total result may be simply confusion, because each master works in his own way, he has his own methods, and you go on accumulating information. That information is bound to be contradictory. Then you will get confused, you may even go insane. It is better to stick to one master and give your heart totally to him. If then nothing happens, move. But be finished with that master, don’t be in an incomplete relationship. Be finished. Either you are transformed, or you come to know that this master is not for you. Then the relationship has broken, there is no incompletion. Then you can move to another master with your total heart.
Now you are here and you are thinking of Sai Baba. This division will become a hindrance. First go back to Sai Baba, be finished with him. Either you are transformed, then there is no need to find anyone; or Sai Baba is not your master, it is proved. Then come to me.
And the same applies to my own disciples. If you are here with me, be finished with me. Be totally with me, so that either the mutation happens and then there is no need to find anyone or to go anywhere, or you come to realize, “This man is not for me.” Then you can leave me totally, then you can move, then somewhere else…. But being here with me halfheartedly and then moving to someone else halfheartedly will not do. Rather, it may be dangerous. You may become so split, so divided, with so many voices in you, that you may become a crowd. This has already happened to many. They know too much and they have drunk from so many sources that now they cannot decide where they stand, who they are. And they go on adding more confusion.
Patience is needed. If you are totally devoted to one master the thing is bound to happen. And I would say that even if the master is not true, the thing can happen if you are totally devoted. Even if the master is false the happening is possible if you are totally devoted – because the happening doesn’t happen through the master, it happens through total devotion. So even a dead master, or a master who has never been, just the name, will do. The real alchemy, the science of mutation, is within you. The master is at the most just a catalytic agent, nothing more.
Go back to your own master and be with him. And don’t try to judge him; you have got no way to judge anybody. All that you can do is give your total heart to him. And what have you got to lose? So why be so afraid? You have got nothing to lose, so why be so untrusting? Give yourself totally. Just this giving totally becomes the base of your transformation. Many times it has happened that a disciple was transformed through a master who was not a master at all. And many times the contrary has also happened: the master was true but the disciple was not transformed. The ultimate thing depends on you, not on me. You are the deciding factor.
So wherever you go, make it a law: go with your total heart. Otherwise you will move with empty hands everywhere. And the more you move, the more you go to this master and that, the more there will be confusion, suffering, and finally you may decide that there exists no one who can transform you. Or, you may come to conclude that there is nothing like transformation, this is all hocus-pocus. And the reason will only be this – that you were never anywhere with your total heart.

The next question:
Osho,
Does reason or intellect have any place at all in sadhana?
Only this much: that reason has to show you that reason is useless, reason has to commit suicide – only this much. One of the greatest Tibetan mystics, Marpa, is reported to have said…. Somebody asked him, “Can’t scriptures help?” He said, “They can. They can help you to go beyond scriptures. That is their only use. Read the scriptures, study them; they will help you to understand that scriptures are useless, and the truth cannot be attained through them.”
Reason can help you only in this way. Reason out, analyze, argue, and through this whole effort you will come to understand that reason cannot lead you to truth. But this is one of the greatest possibilities. Once you realize this you can drop reason, and when reason is dropped, for the first time you start functioning from a totally different center of your being, and that is the heart. And the heart can trust. Reason can never trust, reason by nature is untrusting. Remember, reason can analyze, but can never synthesize. Reason can cut and divide, but can never create a unity or harmony. Reason is just like scissors, scissors can cut and divide.
It happened once that somebody presented Bayazid, one Sufi saint, with a pair of golden scissors. They were valuable, there were some diamonds on those golden scissors, and the man who was presenting them was very happy that it was a rare, unique gift. But Bayazid said, “Take them back, because my whole being is not to cut, not to analyze, not to divide. Rather, you bring a needle and some thread for me, because synthesis is my goal. I want to join things together, not to cut them apart. Golden or not golden,” Bayazid said, “a needle will do. The scissors may be very valuable but they are not for me.”
Reason is scissorlike: it cuts, divides, analyzes. That’s why science cannot do without reason. It doubts, that’s its basic function. It is good – for a particular purpose it is good. As far as matter is concerned, as far as the world of the outside is concerned, reason is the method. Science cannot do without reason, because science is analysis, dissection. That’s why science finally reached the atom, the ultimate division. And now they have divided even the atom, and they have reached electrons. They will go on dividing.
Science reaches to the atomic, and religion reaches to the divine. Religion goes on joining things together, and the ultimate unity is God. The totality has been taken in. Religion cannot work with reasoning, just as science cannot work with trust. If you are a scientist you have to doubt, doubt is the very base. But in religion, if you doubt you are lost. In religion you have to trust.
These dimensions are diametrically opposite. Science moves in the without, religion moves into the within. They move diametrically opposite, their dimensions are opposite, so obviously religion must be opposite to the scientific approach. Science means reason, doubt; religion means trust, faith. So only one thing can be done by your reason and that is to realize that reason will not be of much help in the world of sadhana, in the world of inner discipline. Then drop it and allow another center of your being, the heart, to function.
When the heart starts functioning you will have a different world around you – because you create your world. If you are doubting you create a world which is filled with doubt, depression, sadness, darkness. If you work through the heart you create a different world – of radiancy, of love, of prayer, of joy – but that is totally different. And you cannot change from one world to another, you will have to change from one center to another. And these centers are within you, the center which doubts and the center which trusts.
When you fall in love, what is the use of reason? How can you use your reason while falling in love? That’s why reason says it is a fall: “falling in love.” Who created this phraseology, “falling in love”? Why not “rising in love?” Reason has condemned love, reason says it is a fall. And in a way it is, because from the head you fall to the heart. You start functioning from a different center. But how can you use your reason in love? Is there any way to use it? If you use it, you will destroy the whole phenomenon. The first thing reason will say is, “Doubt!” The first thing reason will say is, “Is there anything in existence which you can call love? Is there anything like love? Dissect it.” And if you dissect, love disappears.
Love is a unity and a very delicate harmony; it cannot be dissected. It is just like a small child jumping, dancing, enjoying. He is alive. You cut the child, dissect him; you put him on a table, a surgeon’s table, and dissect him to find out where life is, what it was that was alive – you will not find it. Not that it was not there; the way you are trying to find it means you will miss, the very method prohibits. The moment you dissect the child he is dead, the life has disappeared, and by dissecting you will come to death, not to life.
Science ultimately leads to death – Hiroshima and Nagasaki are not accidental. And if man still follows science for one more century…even one century is too optimistic; these coming twenty-five years…. If man continuously follows science it may prove a global suicide, because dissection cannot lead to life; the ultimate result is bound to be death. And science cannot believe in life, because you cannot find it anywhere, in any laboratory. You dissect, and life disappears. You dissect your beloved, and love disappears. You go to a surgeon and let him dissect your heart, or take x-rays of your heart to find out whether love is there or not. He may find a cancer there, but he cannot find love. Death can be detected, love cannot be detected. There is no way to have an x-ray of love. Death can be detected; if it is there, if cancer is there, it can be detected, science can find it out.
Go to a library and look at medical encyclopedias to find a definition of health. You will not find it. You will find every disease defined, but you cannot find any definition of health. Science cannot define health, because health can-not be detected. If you go to a doctor he can tell you that you are ill, but he cannot give you a certificate that you are healthy. He can give you a certificate that you are not ill – that’s another matter, negative; he cannot give you a certificate that you are healthy. And there is no definition of what health is.
Science goes on fighting with a method, the very method creates the world of science. Religion doesn’t work with that method. Religion works through a different type of methodology – the heart is the center. And if you can become headless, only then is religion something meaningful for you. If you are too much in the head, religion is not for you. If you are too much in the head, then prayer is very distant, even love is impossible. You can exploit people, you can kill them, but you cannot love them through reason. Or, reason can create such deceptions.
I was just looking at a Peanuts joke-book. Charlie Brown says there, “I love mankind; it is people that I can’t stand.” “I love mankind; it is people that I can’t stand.” The head can love mankind, because there is no one like mankind. You will not find mankind anywhere. Wherever you go you will find people, and the head cannot stand people.
It is easy to love a country, to love humanity, to love the nation, to love Christianity, to love Islam, to love Hinduism. It is very difficult to love a real person, very difficult, because for the real person the heart will be needed. And these concepts, abstract concepts – humanity, Hinduism, Islam, Christianity, or even God – the head can work with, there is no problem, because only thinking is implied, no lived experience is needed. You are not asked to get involved in anything where your heart will be required: just concepts, just logic, mathematics. The head can do that. Science is head work: religion is heart work. You can use your reason only to destroy reason, to help reason to commit suicide.
My whole effort is to persuade you to become headless.
Live without the head, then you will have a life which is totally different from this life you are leading. The life that you are leading is exactly how hell is defined in old scriptures. And if you go into hell, you may not be able to recognize that it is hell; you will think it is only an extension of the old world. You will find everything that you have got already, hell now cannot give you anything new. Man has himself created everything here on this earth.
Help your reason to commit suicide.
Fall within to the heart.
Let love, prayer, meditation, become the center of your world.
But in the beginning help will be needed, because in the beginning you cannot do anything else – you are there, existing in the head. That’s why I go on talking so much. These talks are useless, they are not needed, but you exist in the head, so somehow you have to drop out. I am not giving you theories, I am not giving you some stuff to think about. I am simply helping your reason to come to a point where it itself realizes that just living in reason is missing life in its totality.
In the beginning it is needed. The first step has to be taken out of the head, so the head has to be approached. The moment you have taken that first step, then there is no need. But the first step is most difficult. You are so much obsessed with reason that whatsoever is said, your reason starts working around it. Whatsoever you read here becomes food for your reason.
Religious discourses are really poisons, they are poisonous food. Buddha talks, Krishna talks, Lao Tzu goes on preaching to the disciples. What are they doing? They are doing only one thing: they are giving you poison which looks like food to reason. Reason immediately absorbs it, but it is poison, and reason will have to die. And once reason is dead, for the first time you will be alert, conscious, awakened, and you will see the whole world in a new light.
The world remains the same but you are different, you have changed. Now you can look through different eyes. Then this world is not evil; then there is no suffering in the world. Then the whole world is just the dance of Shiva, just a divine celebration. And the whole life is a play. That’s why Hindus have called it leela: leela means play, a play of divine energy.
Hindus have said that it is not a creation, it is a play. It is not a serious thing, it is simple play – a play of too much energy. But right now you cannot think in that way, that door is closed. Put reason aside, start functioning in a loving way. Bring more heart into your behavior, into your actions, into your movements. Then whatsoever Krishna and Jesus and Lao Tzu have said, that will become a truth to you, it will be revealed. You just need fresh eyes which can see it, hence so much emphasis on trust.

The third question:
Osho,
If the divine is right here and now, then what prevents us from seeing him? Why do we cling to our dream life, even though it has become a misery for us?
No, it has not become a misery for you yet, otherwise you could not cling to it. No one can cling to misery. You still have hopes, you have not yet become totally hopeless. Even in your misery you are hoping. You are thinking that today is misery but tomorrow the doors of paradise will open, and this misery is just a means to reach that paradise tomorrow. Unless the tomorrow dies completely, unless the tomorrow drops completely, unless you become totally hopeless, no hope…only then will you see what misery is there where you are living. And once you become aware of the misery that you are living, you will drop it – there will be no need for me to tell you.
Somebody came to Buddha and asked him, “You go on saying that life is suffering, dukkha; you go on saying that the house is on fire, and I realize that this is so, but how should we come out of that house which is on fire?”
Buddha said, “You are not seeing that the house is on fire. If the house is on fire you will not come to ask me, you will simply jump out of that house.” You won’t go to find a master to learn techniques, you won’t consult The Bible and Koran to find out how to get out of the house which is on fire. When the house is on fire, you will leave your Koran and Bible inside, and you will jump out. And even if a Buddha is sitting there, you will remember only when you are out of the house that Buddha has been left inside, the master has been left inside. When you realize the house is on fire, you simply jump out of it; there is no method.
All methods are postponements. You are in search of a method so that you can postpone, because a method will need time, so you can say to yourself, “How can I jump right now? It will take three years, six years, lives, to practice. It is such a difficult thing, so I will first practice how to jump, and then I will jump. But unless I practice, I cannot jump.”
And you have been doing this practice, this rehearsal, for many lives. You are not here for the first time to ask me – you have asked many times. The same questions you have been asking in every life, but you never do anything, be-cause Buddha may be saying that the house is on fire, but you look…it is a palace, nothing is on fire. Just out of consideration for Buddha you don’t deny him. Otherwise you know he is crazy; the house is not on fire. Or he may be talking in symbols, he may be meaning something else. Or he is such a great man that you cannot understand what he is saying, so just out of respect you don’t deny him, you say yes. Your yes doesn’t mean any more than your no. Your yes, your no are meaningless.

I have heard that Mulla Nasruddin was in love with a woman, but very worried, depressed, always sad, so one friend asked, “What is the matter?”
He said, “Everything is finished, and I am contemplating suicide.”
The friend said, “But you have been contemplating so long. Tell me what the matter is – maybe I can help you.”
Nasruddin said, “I asked the woman to get married to me.”
The friend said, “Yes, no need to say anything more, I have understood. She must have said no. But you are a fool. Don’t believe it when a woman says no; she always means yes.”
Nasruddin said, “I know that wisdom, and if she had said no, then there would have been no problem. But when I proposed she said, ‘Rats.’ So now what to understand? She said, ‘Rats’; she never said no. Had she said no, then yes could be understood.”

Everybody’s mind is just like that woman. When you say no, the yes is hidden behind it. If somebody has slightly penetrating eyes, he can see your yes hidden behind the no. When you say yes it is just skin-deep, the no is hidden behind. And your yes can be turned into no without any effort. Your no can be turned into yes without much effort. Your yes and no are only different in degrees, not in quality. They can be changed, they continuously go on changing.
Even a small child knows this. The father says, “No, you are not going to the movie today.” But even a small child knows that yes is hidden behind it. He starts a tantrum, he starts crying, and within minutes the father says, “Go, go! Go away from here.” The child knows the yes is hidden behind the no. It can be brought out immediately, a little effort is needed. And no child believes in your yes or no because you can change so easily; no child trusts you. But this is how the human mind is.
So the first thing: you are not in misery. Buddha has said so, I may be saying so, but you know that you are not in misery. You go on feeling, hoping, that tomorrow something is going to happen. And tomorrow is the drug; through the tomorrow you intoxicate yourself, and then the day which is present, today, you can suffer it. It is not much, only a question of a few hours and then the tomorrow will be there; it is coming nearer and nearer. Because of the misery on this earth, we conceive of heaven as somewhere in the other life; that heaven is our tomorrow extended. Just to carry on anyhow this misery that is around us, we look somewhere ahead. We never look right now, here.
You are not in misery. I may be saying so; you go on believing that happiness is just near, you are just on the verge of it. The goal is so near, so why leave? Just continue a little more, be patient. If you realize that you are in misery, then there is no need to ask how to drop it. Then masters will be needed to teach you how to cling to it, and even then you will not listen to them.
Once you know that your life is misery, even a buddha cannot persuade you to cling to it. But the penetration is not there. It is not your realization. This knowing is not your knowledge, this wisdom has not been achieved through your own efforts. It is borrowed, it is cheap. You have heard that life is misery, but you have not realized it. And you say, “Why do we go on clinging to this dream life?” It is not a dream life to you; it is real. When you see a dream the dream is real. Somebody who has awakened from sleep may go on saying that whatsoever you are seeing is just a dream, but the person who is dreaming, he is dreaming a reality, not a dream. In a dream, howsoever absurd, you cannot feel it as a dream. You believe in it, because once you feel it is a dream the dream disappears. The dream cannot remain there, your cooperation is withdrawn. You can cooperate only with reality, not with dreams; and if you cooperate dreams become reality – it is through your cooperation.
In the night, deep in sleep, you dream that you have become a king. You may be a beggar, or vice versa: you may be a king and you dream that you have become a beggar. But in that dream you are so identified you cannot think that it could be a dream. If you can think that it could be a dream, the dream will stop immediately. It will be broken, you will come out of it.
Try this. Try this with ordinary dreams. While going to sleep at night, every day just go on thinking only one thought: “When I dream, I must remember that this is a dream.” It will take many months for this thought to drop down into the unconscious, but it will reach there. After three weeks to three months it will reach if you persist, if you don’t forget. Every night while falling into sleep, you go on thinking that when a dream starts you will immediately recognize that it is a dream. After three weeks to three months this will happen; suddenly one day you will start dreaming and you will have the realization, “This is a dream.” Immediately the dream will disappear and your eyes will be open.
If you realize in dream that it is a dream the dream is broken, the dream cannot exist. It exists through your cooperation, your identification is needed. If you are committed to it, if you get involved in it, only then can it continue. And the same happens with the greater dream which is life. When you realize this is a dream, immediately you have become a buddha, you are enlightened. But this enlightenment cannot happen to you by others’ knowing, others’ wisdom.
Buddha may go on calling to you that this is a dream you are living, but you will only feel that this man is a disturbance, a constant nuisance, he is disturbing your life. That’s why we kill such persons. Socrates – we poisoned him because he was a great disturber. Jesus – we crucified him because he was a nuisance. Everybody is dreaming such beautiful dreams, and these persons unnecessarily, and without being invited, go on disturbing people and saying to them, “Wake up! You are dreaming. This is a dream.” And the man may have been dreaming such a beautiful thing that he could throw away all life for that dream.
Now psychologists say that for the ordinary mind, for the normal mind, dreaming is a must. If you cannot dream, if you are not allowed to dream, you will go mad. Previously it was thought that sleep is a necessity, now the new research says a totally different thing. The new research says that sleep is not a must; it is not sleep which gives you rest, it is dreaming which gives you rest. And if you are allowed to dream you will remain happy, if you are not allowed to dream you will go insane.
The whole night there is a rhythm: sleep period, then dream period, then sleep period, then dream period, of almost the same duration. If you sleep for eight hours, at least for four hours you are dreaming: forty minutes dreaming, then forty minutes sleep, then forty minutes dream, then forty minutes sleep – just like day and night, a rhythm.
They have tried many experiments, because now it can be known from the outside whether you are dreaming or not. Not many devices are needed. When a person is sleeping you can simply go on looking at his eyes. When he dreams the eyes move fast. He is looking at the dream, so the eyes move fast. When he is fast asleep the eyes stop and become dead. So just sitting by a person who is asleep, you can note down when he is dreaming and when he is asleep.
They have tried to disturb persons while they are asleep, in their sleep periods of forty minutes. When they are dreaming they don’t disturb them; when they start sleeping they disturb them. Many nights you can disturb a person while he is asleep but allow the dream period, and he will be happy and okay, no problem; he will not feel tired in the morning. But do otherwise: when he is asleep let him sleep; when he starts dreaming wake him. If continuously the whole night, for only three nights, you don’t allow a person to dream, then he will go insane. Why? It is so much needed. Your ordinary mind feeds on dreams, and if a person is not allowed for three days to dream he will start dreaming while awake. It is such a great need. He will be awake, sitting in his chair, and dreaming. He will have to fulfill the quota, in the day he will have to dream.
And if you insist for many weeks, if for at least three weeks a person is not allowed to dream, he will become hallucinatory. He will be awake and talking to a man who is not present. He will become just like madmen. Now psychologists say that these madmen whom we have pushed into madhouses may be simply persons who have been starved as far as dream food is concerned. They need more dreams to be readjusted to normal life. What is the problem? Why are dreams needed so much? Why can’t you live without dreams? Because your life is so miserable that only through dreams can you exist. If you come to know life as it is, in its nudity, without any dreams, you will commit suicide.
Albert Camus has written that the only philosophical problem is whether to commit suicide or not, and that is the big problem. If you come to realize that the whole life is just nonsense…. What are you doing? What is happening? Nothing is happening, and you continue in suffering. If you are reasonable, you will start thinking of committing suicide.
Dreams help you to not commit suicide. They help you to create worlds of your own in which you can be happy, in which you can enjoy, in which you can become emperors, in which you can become conquerors, in which you can fly and reach the planets, in which you can do anything. You are free only in your dreams. The whole life is a slavery, only in your dreams can you destroy the whole world and create a new one.
You can have a beautiful woman in your dreams, a beautiful man. Life is not so beautiful. And howsoever beautiful a woman, you come closer and the flowers disappear and only thorns are left. Howsoever beautiful a man, a person, if you are far away the beauty is there, but the closer you come, the more the beauty starts evaporating. Sartre says, “Hell is other people – the other is the hell.” The closer you come to the other, the more a hell is created. Only in your dreams can you be in paradise.
So don’t say that you know that your life is suffering and dreamlike – it is real to you. To you I say it is real; to a buddha it is unreal. But you are not a buddha yet, so remain with your reality, and remain with your real mind. Don’t move with borrowed things, because once you move on borrowed things you will never come to the reality again.
“If the divine is right here and now, then what prevents us from seeing him? Why do we cling to our dream life even though it has become a misery for us?” Think again. Contemplate on it. If it is a misery for you – for you I insist again and again, not for me – if it is a misery for you, don’t do anything. Remain with the fact that your life has become a misery to you, because if you start doing something about it you may again create hope in the tomorrow. Just remain with the fact. If it is hell, remain in hell, don’t do anything. Just remain alert that this is hell. And if you can be patient and alert and wait, just through waiting the hell will disappear, it will fall down. It needs your cooperation. It is just like dreams.
That’s why Shankara and Buddha say your life is a dream life – because it can be just dropped like dreams. If you become alert a dream disappears; if you become alert of your misery, the misery disappears. You cling to it because you think it is not misery, or some happiness is hidden somewhere in it. It may be misery outwardly, but a deep treasure is hidden behind it, so you have to cling to it for that treasure. Your life is misery – but not for you. Realize its misery, it falls down. The very truth transforms you. And the moment misery falls the divine is revealed. To a miserable mind the divine cannot be revealed. To a celebrating mind the divine is revealed.
Remember, only to a celebrating mind, to a mind which is happy, blissful, enjoying moment to moment, ecstatic, is the divine revealed. To a miserable mind the divine cannot be revealed, because a miserable mind is closed. The divine is here and now, but you are not here and now. If you are also here and now then the divine will be revealed to you. The whole of my effort is to bring you here and now. This very moment, if you can be here, then nothing is hidden.

The last question:
Osho,
The rishi of the Upanishad fears he may speak some untruth, and so he prays, “May my speech be rooted in my mind.” Does that mean that when he comes down to earth to speak, he comes out of his enlightened consciousness to do so, back into the ordinary mind again? If he is permanently in divine consciousness, how can nontruth come in?
There is no way of coming back to the ordinary state of the mind. Once you are enlightened there is no way to become blind again, no way to fall into the darkness – because this light is not something accidental. When you become enlightened you have become the light, so wherever you go, even in darkness, it will be light there. It is not something external, the light is not something accidental. Enlightenment means you have become the light, so now there is no way to fall into the darkness again. Wherever you go, even if there was darkness before, just by your reaching there the darkness will disappear. So there is no way of falling back.
Then why is this rishi afraid? Why does he fear? He fears for a deep reason. The fear is not that he can utter untruth, the fear is that the moment the truth is expressed in language it becomes distorted. He is not going to utter any untruth, but the medium of language is such that whatsoever you express through it, it changes, its nature changes. It is just like this: a river is flowing and you push a straight stick down into the water. The moment it penetrates the water it is no longer straight, the medium of the water and the refraction of light rays change it – the straight stick is no longer straight. Pull it out again, it is straight; push it down again, it is no longer straight. The stick remains straight, but because of the medium of water it appears as though it is not straight.
The truth is realized in a silent mind where there is no language, no words, no verbal existence…total silence, soundlessness. In that silence the truth is realized, and then it has to be expressed through language. That which has been known beyond language, that which transcends language, has to be forced again into language to communicate. And with you there is no other way to communicate it. You cannot understand silence.
I can remain here silent; you cannot understand it. If you can understand silence then there is no need to express, but then you will not be here, then there will be no need to come here also. If you can understand my silence you can understand the silence of the sky, because the language is the same. You can understand the silence of the rocks, you can understand the silence of the night. You can understand the silence with which the cosmos all over is filled. There is no need to come to me because silence is everywhere – if you understand it.
You don’t understand it. That’s why you don’t go to a rock, you don’t go to a tree, you have come to me…because the tree cannot express it in language, the rock cannot express it in language. The rock also exists in the divine as much as I, but the rock cannot express it through language. You need language. The fear is because of you, the fear is because of the very medium of language. Truth said becomes untrue.
Lao Tzu has said, “The Tao that can be said is no more Tao. The truth that can be said is no more true.” Why? – because language, the very mechanism of language, depends on duality. For example, if you ask me whether God is light or darkness, if I say light, it is wrong, because he is also darkness. If I say darkness, it is wrong, because he is also light. If I say he is light, then the question arises, “Then darkness exists. Where does it exist? Then there must be something other than God where darkness exists.” If I say God is life…then death? Who is death? If I say God is death, then who is life? And if I say God is both life and death, then it becomes a paradox. If I say God is both light and darkness, then you will say, “You are not saying much, it is a paradox. How can one be both?”
These are the four ways: either I can say God is light or darkness, or I can say God is both, or I can say God is not both, but the problem remains. And these are the only ways to express. That’s why Mahavira has developed saptabhangi – sevenfold logic. You ask one question and Mahavira will answer seven answers. And if you can stay with him to listen to his seven answers, you will be more confused than when you came to him.
If you ask about God, he will say God is; immediately he will say God is not; immediately he will say God is both, is and is not; immediately he will say God is both not, is and is not – and he goes on. Sevenfold will be his answer, because he says, “I cannot be untrue. This is the whole truth.” But you remain the same as you were and even more confused. You need a clear answer, you want that he either says God is, or God is not.
That’s why Buddha remained silent. You asked about God, he would remain silent. He said that he would not answer eleven questions, and those eleven questions are the base of the whole of philosophy; all metaphysics consists of those eleven questions. He would not answer because he said, “Whatsoever I say will be wrong, or I will have to say it in such a way that nothing will become clear – as Mahavira is doing.”
This rishi is going to try to communicate exactly, meaningfully, not creating paradoxes; linguistically understandable statements he will try in this Upanishad. That’s why he is afraid – because the nature of language distorts.
Secondly, the moment something is said and you have heard it, you will destroy it. Firstly it will be destroyed by the medium of language; secondly, it has entered your mind, and your mind is a madhouse. Once it enters your mind, what meaning will come out of it no one can say. How you will interpret it, how you will follow it, what you will do according to your interpretation, no one knows.
Buddha has said somewhere that it is dangerous to talk to ignorant people, because whatsoever you say they think they have understood, and then they are the masters. You are no more in possession of your truth; they also possess it, and they will interpret it. That’s why so many philosophies exist.
Buddha died. At least twenty-four systems immediately were there, twenty-four leaders saying, “This is the meaning of Buddha” – and they all were contradicting each other. Twenty-four schools, and each school against the other twenty-three: “Those twenty-three others are absolutely wrong!” This happens even when a master is alive, nothing can be said about what happens when a master is dead.
I remember, once it happened: Freud was old, and just before he died, two or three years before…. And Freud was not a religious man at all, not a man of trust and faith, but a man of doubt, logic and reason. But still he was working in a very dangerous field – the mind – so he had become a master in his own right. He had disciples, a great following, a big movement, so thinking that he was going to die soon as he was ill and old, all his great disciples gathered, just to meet him for the last time.
Twenty people were there, Freud was sitting with them and they were discussing. They were discussing, and they forgot that Freud was still alive. They were discussing what Freud meant about certain principles and each one had his own interpretation. They discussed, argued, and there was chaos, and there was no possibility of their coming to one conclusion – and Freud was sitting there! He suddenly stood and said, “My friends, you have completely forgotten – I am still alive! You can ask me what my meaning is.”
But if I had been there I would have said to Freud, “Even that will not help, because they can ask what your meaning is, but again they will interpret the meaning. Then again there will be twenty interpretations. ‘What is the meaning of your meaning?’”
You cannot escape disciples. That is the fear.

============================================================

The sage Sankriti then said to the sun god:
O Lord, please teach me the supreme knowledge.

The sun god said:
I shall now explain to you this most rare knowledge, upon the attainment of which you will become free while yet dwelling in this body. See in all beings the Brahman, who is one, unborn, still, imperishable, infinite, immutable and conscious; so seeing live in peace and bliss. Do not see anything except the self and the supreme. This state is known as yoga.
Rooted thus in yoga, carry out your deeds.

The mind of one who is thus rooted in yoga gradually withdraws from all desires, and the seeker feels blissful while engaging himself each day in meritorious acts. He has no interest whatsoever in the contrary efforts of the ignorant.
He never betrays the secrets of one to another,
and he occupies himself solely with lofty deeds.

He performs only such gentle acts as do not disturb others. He fears sin and does not crave any self-indulgence. He utters loving and affectionate words. He lives in the company of saints and studies the scriptures. With complete unity of mind, speech and action he follows them. Seeking to cross
the ocean that is the world,
he cultivates the above-mentioned ideas. And he is called a beginner,
one performing his preliminaries. This is called the first stage.

The sage Sankriti then said to the sun god: O Lord, please teach me the supreme knowledge.
The Upanishads know only the supreme knowledge. What is this supreme knowledge? And why is it called supreme? The Upanishads call that knowledge supreme which is not gathered from without, which is not gathered at all. You cannot be educated in it, it cannot be taught; it happens within, it flowers in you.
The first distinction to be made is that there is knowledge which can be taught. The Upanishads call that knowledge lower knowledge. Precisely, they call it avidya – ignorance with information – because that which can be taught to you remains in the mind, it never reaches exactly to you. You remain untouched, your center remains untouched, your being is not in any way changed, transformed. Only the mind collects it, only the brain cells collect it, so it is the same as when we feed a computer – in the same way your mind is fed.
From the very childhood you have been taught many things. They have not reached you, and they will never reach you. The mind gathers them, the mind becomes filled with them. And the mind is so complex that in a single mind all the libraries of the world can be fed; a single head can contain all the knowledge that exists in this world – but the Upanishads say you will not become knowing through that. It is mechanical, consciousness is not needed for it. If even a computer can do it, then it is not worth it.
What the computer cannot do is supreme knowledge. The computer cannot become self-knowing, there is no possibility for the computer to become self-conscious. That which has not been fed into the computer cannot happen to it, and if the same is the case with man then there is no soul, then you are also a natural biocomputer. If everything that comes out of you has been fed into you, if exactly the same amount comes out that has been fed in, if nothing new happens within, then you have no soul; then you are a very complex mechanism, that’s all.
So the whole religion depends on the phenomenon of supreme knowledge. Is it possible that something can happen within, absolutely new, which has never been taught to you, which has not been cultivated in you? If something so original happens to you, only that can prove that you have a soul; otherwise you are simply a brain, a complex mechanism but still a mechanism, and then there is no possibility of any transformation.
The Upanishads call that knowledge supreme which happens within. That’s why religion cannot be taught. You can teach science, you can teach many other things, but you cannot teach religion. And if you teach religion, religion becomes false. That’s what missionaries of all the religions have done to this earth. They have been teaching religion on just the same lines as science is taught, so they fill your mind with certain knowledge and you start repeating that knowledge. You may even start living that knowledge, but you will remain a computer, a robot.
The Upanishads say there is a possibility and there is a way to attain the supreme knowledge. So what will the master do if it cannot be taught? That’s why I say a master is not a teacher. The master is not going to teach you; he is going to create a situation around you, only the situation. He will create devices around you, he will create only the soil – the seed you have already got within you.
The situation can be provided and the seed will start sprouting, the dead seed will become alive. The seed will die, but a plant will come in its place. And this seed, this seedling, this growing plant, will become a tree. But this is something which happens within you. You can be helped, but you cannot be taught.
A master can create a situation around you – just a situation, remember. And whatsoever he teaches is not knowledge, he teaches only how to create the situation. He teaches you methods; he cannot give you the conclusion – he can only help indirectly. That’s why it is such a delicate phenomenon. And only one who has got it within him, one who has passed through all the stages, one who has become a big tree, flowering – only he can create the situation around you. So a person who has not become enlightened himself cannot help you; on the contrary, he may hinder you.
If it was just a teaching, then even scriptures would be helpful: The Bible would do, the Koran, the Vedas, the Upanishads would do. But you can read The Bible, you can memorize it, you can become an expert, you can become a scholar – but you will not become a religious man. Just by memorizing The Bible, Christ is not going to happen to you. The Christ can happen to you only when the situation is created around you, and your own inner seed grows. Religion is not a teaching, it is a growth. And what is supreme knowledge? – when you grow, when you know, when for the first time you have your own eyes to see into reality.
So the first thing: supreme knowledge is that knowledge which happens to you but cannot be taught. The second thing: all knowledge is about something other than you – supreme knowledge is absolutely about you. Or, it may even be wrong to say that it is about you. It is not about, because whatsoever it is about is about something other than you. It will be better to say that it is you, not about you…because many things can be taught about you. It can be asked, “Who are you?” Someone can say, “You are Brahman, you are the divine, you are the absolute, the soul, atman.” But this is about you; this is not supreme knowledge – somebody else is teaching it to you.
When you become knowledge, when you become the knowing center, when your very consciousness becomes the door, then supreme knowledge has happened to you. Mathematics is about something, physics is about something else, chemistry about something else, psychology is about the mind – supreme knowledge is you. No university, no school is of any help. Directly, nothing can be done about it, only an indirect help is possible.
The sage Sankriti then said to the sun god: O Lord, please teach me the supreme knowledge.
He is asking an absurd question: Please teach me the supreme knowledge. It can-not be taught – but that’s how a disciple has to reach the master. The disciple cannot know that there is something which cannot be taught; every disciple has to come to the master and ask to be taught. It is absurd for the master, because he knows it cannot be taught, but every seeker thinks that everything can be taught – even the supreme knowledge can be taught.

It happened in Upanishadic days that one young boy, Svetaketu, was sent by his father to a gurukul, to a family of an enlightened master, to learn. He learned everything that could be learned, he memorized all the Vedas and all the science available in those days. He became proficient in them, he became a great scholar; his fame started spreading all over the country. Then there was nothing else to be taught, so the master said, “You have known all that can be taught. Now you can go back.”
Thinking that everything had happened and there was nothing else – because whatsoever the master knew, he also knew, and the master had taught him everything – Svetaketu went back. Of course with great pride and ego, he came back to his father.
When he was entering the village his father, Uddalak, looked out of the window at his son coming back from the university. He saw the way he was walking – very proudly, the way he was holding his head – in a very egoistic way, the way he was looking all around – very self-conscious that he knew. The father became sad and depressed, because this is not the way of one who really knows, this is not the way of one who has come to know the supreme knowledge.
The son entered the house. He was thinking that his father would be very happy – he had become one of the suprememost scholars of the country; he was known everywhere, respected everywhere – but he saw that the father was sad, so he asked, “Why are you sad?”
The father said, “Only one question I have to ask you. Have you learned that by learning which there is no need to learn anything any more? Have you known that by knowing which all suffering ceases? Have you been taught that which cannot be taught?”
The boy also became sad. He said, “No. Whatsoever I know has been taught to me, and I can teach it to anybody who is ready to learn.”
The father said, “Then you go back and ask your master that you be taught that which cannot be taught.”
The boy said, “But that is absurd. If it cannot be taught, how can the master teach me?”
The father said, “That is the art of the master: he can teach you that which cannot be taught. You go back.”
He went back. Bowing down to his master’s feet, he said, “My father has sent me for an absolutely absurd thing. Now I don’t know where I am and what I am asking you. My father has told me to come back and return only when I have learned that which cannot be learned, when I have been taught that which cannot be taught. What is it? What is this? You never told me about it.”
The master said, “Unless one inquires, it cannot be told; you never inquired about it. But now you are starting a totally different journey. And remember, it cannot be taught, so it is very delicate; only indirectly will I help you. Do one thing: take all the animals of my gurukul – there were at least four hundred cows, bulls and other animals – and go to the deepest forest possible where nobody ever comes and moves. Live with these animals in silence. Don’t talk, because these animals cannot understand any language. So remain silent, and when just by reproduction these four hundred animals have become one thousand, then come back.”
It was going to be a long time – until four hundred animals had become one thousand. And he was to go without saying anything, without arguing, without asking, “What are you telling me to do? Where will it lead?” He was to just live with animals and trees and rocks; not talking, and forgetting the human world completely. Because your mind is a human creation, if you live with human beings the mind is continuously fed. They say something, you say something – the mind goes on learning, it goes on revolving.
“So go,” the master said, “to the hills, to the forest. Live alone. Don’t talk. And there is no use in thinking, because these animals won’t understand even your thinking. Drop all your scholarship here.”
Svetaketu followed. He went to the forest and lived with the animals for many years. For a few days thoughts remained there in the mind – the same thoughts repeating themselves again and again. Then it became boring. If new thoughts are not felt, then you will become aware that the mind is just repetitive, just a mechanical repetition; it goes on in a rut. And there was no way to get new knowledge. With new knowledge the mind is always happy, because there is something again to grind, something again to work out; the mechanism goes on moving.
Svetaketu became aware. There were four hundred animals, birds, other wild animals, trees, rocks, rivers and streams, but no man and no possibility of any human communication. There was no use in being very egoistic, because these animals didn’t know what type of great scholar this Svetaketu was. They didn’t consider him at all; they didn’t look at him with respect, so by and by the pride disappeared, because it was futile and it even looked foolish to walk in a prideful way with the animals. Even Svetaketu started feeling, “If I remain egoistic these animals will laugh at me – so what am I doing?” Sitting under the trees, sleeping near the streams, by and by his mind became silent.
The story is beautiful. The years passed and his mind became so silent that Svetaketu completely forgot when he had to return. He became so silent that even this idea was not there. The past dropped completely, and with the dropping of the past the future drops, because the future is nothing but a projection of the past – just the past reaching into the future. So he forgot what the master had said, he forgot when he had to return. There was no when and where, he was just here and now. He lived in the moment just like the animals, he became a cow.
The story says that when the animals became one thousand, they started feeling uncomfortable. They were waiting for Svetaketu to take them back to the ashram and he had forgotten, so one day the cows decided to speak to Svetaketu and they said, “Now it is time enough, and we remember that the master had said that you must come back when the animals became one thousand, and you have completely forgotten. Now is the time and we must go back. We have be-come one thousand.”
So Svetaketu went back with the animals. The master looked from the door of his hut at Svetaketu coming with one thousand animals, and he said to his other disciples, “Look, one thousand and one animals are coming.” Svetaketu had become such a silent being – no ego, no self-consciousness, just moving with the animals as one of them.
The master came to receive him; the master was dancing, ecstatic. He embraced Svetaketu and he said, “Now there is nothing to say to you – you have already known. Why have you come? There is no need to come now, there is nothing to be taught. You have already known.”
Svetaketu said, “Just to pay my respects, just to touch your feet, just to be grateful. It has happened, and you have taught me that which cannot be taught.”

This is what a master is to do: create a situation in which the thing happens. So only indirect effort can be made, indirect help, indirect guidance. And wherever direct guidance is given, wherever your mind is taught, it is not religion. It may be theology but not religion; it may be philosophy but not religion.
The supreme knowledge is that which cannot be taught. But the sage Sankriti asked: Teach me the supreme knowledge.
The sun god said:

I shall now explain to you this most rare knowledge, upon the attainment of which you will become free while yet dwelling in this body. See in all beings the Brahman, who is one, unborn, still, imperishable, infinite, immutable and conscious; so seeing live in peace and bliss. Do not see anything except the self and the supreme. This state is known as yoga. Rooted thus in yoga, carry out your deeds.
The first thing he said was: See in all beings the Brahman. This too is to create a situation, remember. This is not a teaching, this is giving a device. What do you see? You see trees, you see rocks, you see men, you see dogs, you see cows – you see many things, but not one. You go on counting waves but you don’t see the hidden ocean.
The sun god said to Sankriti that the first thing is to see the one. Apparently there are many, but behind the many the one is hidden. So whenever you see the many, remember this is the surface, not the soul. Penetrate deep; forget the surface and try to know the center, the depth. The depth is one.
Go to the sea, there are millions of waves. You never see the sea, you always see the waves, because they are on the surface. But every wave is nothing but a waving of the sea, the sea is waving through all the waves. Remember the ocean and forget the waves – because waves don’t really exist, only the ocean exists.
The ocean can exist without the waves but the waves cannot exist without the ocean. If there is no ocean there can be no waves – or can there be? Then what will wave in them? They cannot be, but the ocean can be. There is no need for the waves, the ocean can be silent. If there is no wind blowing the ocean will be there, silent.
The ocean can exist without the waves, but the waves cannot exist without the ocean. So waves are just the surface, and waves are accidental – through the action of the winds they have come into existence. They have come into existence from without, some accident has created them. If the wind is not blowing the ocean will be silent and non-waving. So waves are accidents created from without, on the surface; the ocean is something totally different.
And the same is the case with all beings. The tree is also a wave, and the man is also a wave, and the rock is also a wave. And behind the rock and the tree and the man the same ocean is hidden. That ocean is called by the Upanishads the Brahman. The Brahman, the ultimate soul, the absolute soul, is just the ocean. So look at a man but don’t cling to the surface, immediately move to the depth and see the Brahman hidden there.
You can do this. Just try it in this camp. Whenever you have time, sit with your friend, your beloved, your wife, your husband, or anybody – a stranger will do – just sit and look into each other’s eyes without thinking, and try to penetrate the eyes without thinking. Just look deeper and deeper into each other’s eyes. Soon you will become aware that the waves have been crossed and an ocean has opened unto you.
Look into each other’s eyes deeply, because eyes are just the doors. And if you don’t think, if you just stare into the eyes, soon the waves will disappear and the ocean will be revealed. Do it first with a human being, because you are closer to that type of wave. Then move to animals – a little more distant; then move to trees – still more distant waves; then move to the rocks.
If you can look deep down into the eyes, you will feel that the man has disappeared, the person has disappeared. Some oceanic phenomenon is hidden behind and this person was just a waving of a depth, a wave of something unknown, hidden. Try this; it will be something worth knowing. That’s what the sun god said to Sankriti: See in all beings the Brahman, who is one…not many.
So wherever you feel any distinction, know that you are on the surface. All distinctions are on the surface; “many” belongs to the surface. In English we have a word, “universe,” that is almost parallel to Brahman. “Uni” means one, but whatsoever you see around you is not “universe.” You may call it a universe, but it is not, it is a multiverse. Many you see, not one; names you see, not the nameless; waves you see, but not the ocean.
This is to create a situation. Look deep and don’t be deceived by the surface, and soon you will become aware of an ocean all around. Then you will see that you are also just a wave, your ego is just a wave – behind that ego, the nameless, the one, is hidden.
See in all beings the Brahman, who is one, unborn…
…Because only waves are born, the ocean remains the same. The many are born, the one remains the same. You are born and you will have to die; hence the fear of death, so much fear of death, but the Brahman in you is unborn and undying. Everyone is afraid of death. Why this fear? And nothing can be done about it; only one thing is certain in life, and that is death.

It is said of one Zen master, Tojo, that he remained silent his whole life, he would not speak. When he was a child it was thought that he was incapable of speaking, but he was so intelligent that sooner or later people realized that he was just keeping silence, he was not dumb. His eyes were so radiant, intelligent, wise; his behavior, his actions, were so intelligent that people became aware that he was simply keeping a deep silence – maybe continuing some vow to remain silent that he may have taken in his past life. And he remained silent for eighty years.
The first and last statement he made was on the day he was going to die. The morning he was going to die, just as the sun was rising, he collected his followers – many had started following him. He was not speaking, but he was living something, and that living something became so significant to those who could understand that there were many who followed him; many were his disciples. They would just sit around Tojo, they would just be in contact with his silence, and many were transformed.
He collected all his followers and said, “This evening when the sun sets, I will die. This is my first and last statement.”
So somebody said, “But if you can speak, why did you remain silent your whole life?”
He said, “Everything else is uncertain, only death is certain. And I want only to speak about something which is certain.”

Once born, death is certain; everything else is uncertain. Why is death so certain? Nothing can be done about it. Science may help to prolong life, but death cannot be destroyed, because it is implied in the very phenomenon of birth; it has happened already. Death is one pole of the same phenomenon of which birth is the beginning, the other pole.
It is just like a magnet: on a magnet you have two poles – the positive and the negative. You can cut off the negative pole, you can cut the magnet in half, but immediately the negative pole will appear on the place where you have cut. Now there are two magnets, and each magnet will have two poles. Before there was one magnet and it had two poles, negative and positive. Now you have cut it into two pieces. The one which has the positive pole will immediately create the negative, and the one which has the negative pole will immediately create the positive. You can go on cutting the magnet, but howsoever many fragments you cut, each fragment will have two poles – because a magnet cannot exist with one pole, it is impossible.
Life has two poles: birth is the positive pole, death is the negative. You cannot destroy, you can at the most prolong. You can at the most make a bigger magnet, but the other pole will be there. You can cut it and make a small magnet, but the other pole will be there. This polarity is absolute. So whatsoever science thinks or imagines, it can never happen. Death cannot be destroyed; through science, remember, it is impossible to destroy death.
Once born you have to die. But right now, behind this ego, the unborn is flowing. If you can look and see and feel the unborn, the fear of death disappears – and there is no other way to destroy the fear.
Death is there and you are going to die, you cannot be immortal as an ego. But if you look deep, and if you can find the depth of your ego where ego is no more, if you can see the ocean beyond the wave, you are already immortal. But that one which is hidden behind was never born and it will never die. Unless you come to know something which is not born, you cannot become deathless.
See in all beings the Brahman, who is one, unborn, still, imperishable, infinite, immutable and conscious; so seeing live in peace and bliss.
Once you can see that, bliss is just the by-product, peace simply happens. And it cannot happen before. Death is there – how can you be at peace? Death is there – how can you be at home? Death is there – how can you rest? Death will create tensions, anguish, worries. Death is there constantly hammering on your head – how can you be silent? And how can you love this existence? And how can you feel grateful to the divine? Impossible! Death is there. You can forget it for moments, but it is hidden; it is always there behind the mind. And whatsoever you do, knowingly or unknowingly, the phenomenon of death influences you. It is always there just like a shadow, it darkens your life.
People come to me and they say, “We are sad, depressed, and we don’t know what the cause is. There is no visible cause for our being sad and depressed. We have everything that life can give, still we are sad and depressed.”
They will remain sad and depressed. They may not know what the cause is; the cause is there – the death always around you, around the corner, waiting for you. And wherever you are moving, you are moving to the death; whatsoever you do, every act, leads you to the death.

I have heard one Sufi tale. Once it happened that one king had a dream. In the night when he was fast asleep he dreamed he saw a shadow, a very dark, dangerous looking, ferocious shadow, standing just behind him. He asked, “Who are you?”
The shadow said, “I am your death, and before the sun sets tomorrow, I am coming to meet you. I have come just to inform you.”
The king wanted to ask, “Is there any way to escape from you?” but he became so afraid that he was awakened. He couldn’t ask, and the dream disappeared. So in the middle of the night he gathered all his wise men and he said, “There is no time, so you decide immediately what this dream means. What does this symbol mean? Interpret it.”
All the Freuds and Jungs and Adlers of his day were called immediately to interpret the dream. They came with their big scriptures, books and charts, and the king became afraid. He said, “Don’t waste time! You have to decide immediately!”
They said, “It is a very intricate thing, very complex, and it has never happened before so there is no precedent. We cannot decide immediately, it has to be analyzed and it will take time.”
But the king prayed to them, “Do it as soon as possible, because I have to decide and do something. The sun is just going to rise, and once the sun has risen it has already set – then there is no time. The sun will move and set, and within twelve hours everything will be finished!”
They started discussing, and there was much discussion – as it always happens with persons whose minds are filled with knowledge. Everyone was of a different opinion and the king was still more confused.
The king had one old servant. The old servant came near to him and whispered in the king’s ear, “Don’t wait. I know these people. Even if you have one hundred years to live, they will not come to any conclusion – they have never come to a conclusion. For centuries they have been discussing; conclusion is not their goal at all, discussion is their interest. These are philosophers. For thousands of years they have been discussing and have reached no conclusion – philosophy has no conclusion. And every answer that has been given by these fellows creates one hundred questions, so simply don’t wait for them.”
The king said, “Then what am I supposed to do?”
The old man said, “I am a common man, not a learned man, and as far as I can see you should do a commonsense thing: you take your fastest horse and escape from this palace, this palace is dangerous. At least this much is certain – that you should not be here at that moment when death comes. Go as far away as possible.”
It was worth considering. The king said, “Okay. There is no other possibility, because these fellows are confusing me even more. So let them discuss and let them decide, and I will escape.”
When you have fear, escape seems to be the only door. So he took his fastest horse, a wonderful horse, and he escaped from the palace. When the sun was rising he was out of the town, when the sun was setting he was hundreds of miles away. And when the sun was just going to set he reached a big tree. He thought, “This will be a good place for the night.” He came down from his horse and he thanked the horse, saying, “You are just wonderful. You are the only friend who helped me in such a great difficulty. When scholars were of no use, you helped me. At least you have brought me so far away.”
While he was saying this and patting the horse, suddenly he saw the same shadow behind him. He trembled and he said, “What! You have come?”
The shadow said, “Yes, I was waiting under this tree for you the whole day. And I was afraid whether your horse would come or not – the place is so far away from your palace. Let me thank your horse, he is really wonderful.”

Whatsoever you do, and wherever you escape, you cannot escape death; wherever you reach, death will be waiting for you there. If you are rich you can have a fast horse; if you are poor you will have to walk, but you will reach – you will reach anyway.
Fear is there around the heart, the heart is in the grip of the fear of death. And it spoils everything. You cannot really love. When you are in love, death is there. And love is so deathlike that lovers always become conscious of death. If you have loved anyone you will be aware of it. You may not have noticed, but whenever you love someone the lover is bound to ask, “Will you love me forever?” – the fear of death. “Will you always be with me?” – the fear of death. When you are deep in love you become more aware, because deep in love you are near the heart, and near the heart is the shadow of death. Every beat of the heart is aware that the next heartbeat may not come. Wherever you move, you cannot feel blissful.
Look at a beautiful flower. The beauty of it grips you, for a moment the mind stops; but suddenly you become aware that the flower is going to die by the evening, and just after the beauty of the flower comes the sadness of death. It is everywhere. You will find it moving with you, moment to moment. How can you be at ease? How can you be at peace? How can you live in bliss? Impossible!
The sun god said, “But if you become aware of the one behind the many, if you become aware of the one in the many….” If this multiverse disappears and the universe appears, you will be at peace – because then you cannot die. The ocean cannot die, the life energy that is waving in you cannot die. The wave will disappear, but the energy will continue in other waves. That’s what reincarnation means.
All the religions which have penetrated very deep – Hinduism, Jainism, Buddhism, three religions which have penetrated very deep into the soul of man – they all believe in reincarnation. Mohammedanism, Christianity and Judaism don’t believe in reincarnation, but they never worked very hard; they never penetrated the heart of man very deeply. They remained social phenomena, they were more sociopolitical, less religious. The whole history of Islam is sociopolitical, and whenever anybody in the fold of Islam tried to penetrate deeply, he was immediately destroyed and killed.
For example, al-Hillaj Mansoor: he was a man of the same caliber as Buddha, a man who penetrated deeply. When he came to feel that he is Brahman, he is God, he declared it. He said, “Ana’l haq – I am Brahman.”
But this appeared blasphemy to Mohammedans, and they immediately killed him. They said, “This is impossible. At the most you can be a worshipper, but you cannot become God. This is too much, this cannot be tolerated – a human being declaring that he is God!”
They killed Mansoor, they killed many Sufis. In Islam only Sufis penetrated deeply. Sufism is the central core of Islam, the essential Islam – but Islam killed them. So just to survive Sufis disappeared. They became a secret society and they compromised. As far as their outward behavior was concerned they compromised with Islam, deep down they remained a very revolutionary sect. But they were not accepted by the society at large; Islam remained a sociopolitical phenomenon.
Christianity also remained a sociopolitical phenomenon. It created kingdoms. Even the pope himself became a king, and he still rules a small kingdom, the Vatican. Eckhart, Boehme and Blake were never accepted, the main current never accepted them – and many were destroyed and killed. Whosoever tried to assert the deepest phenomenon of one’s being, the absolute reality, he was never accepted in Christianity. That’s why they couldn’t penetrate to the phenomenon of reincarnation.
Millions of lives you have had, and if you don’t stop in your stupidities you are going to have millions more. If you stop then waves disappear – you become the ocean. And the ocean is at peace, the ocean is always blissful. So it is not a question of how to put your mind at ease, how to relax the mind. No, that won’t do. It is a question of how to move deep, so deep that the mind is left behind and you reach the base of your being, the very substantial base of your being, and the mind becomes the surface, the waving surface. Only then is there peace and bliss.
Said the sun god:
Do not see anything except the self and the supreme. This state is known as yoga. Rooted thus in yoga, carry out your deeds.
This is the state of knowing that waves are on the surface and you are the ocean, not the waves; the state of knowing that waves belong to you, but you are not the waves – they are just your clothing, just your body. You are the nameless, infinite ocean. The sun god said, “This is the state of yoga” – one of the most beautiful definitions of yoga.
Knowing oneself as the ocean is yoga. You have met, the meeting has happened. You are no longer separate, you are no longer an island – you have become one with a vast continent of consciousness. This is yoga.
The word yoga means meeting, joining together. The root from which the word yoga comes is the same as for the English word yoke: yoking together, joining together, becoming one. When you feel you are the Brahman, this is the state of yoga.
Rooted thus in yoga, carry out your deeds.
Then there is no need to escape to the forest. The Upanishads were never life-negative, remember this. There is a deep misunderstanding in the West, and it has been created by one of the most sincere men of this age, Albert Schweitzer. He himself was in a misunderstanding and was very confused about Eastern mysticism. He created the idea in the West that the Upanishads are life-negative, not life-affirmative. This is wrong, absolutely wrong. The Upanishads are life-affirming. They don’t say, “Move away from life”; they simply say, “Know the deepest life and then act.” They don’t say, “Stop waving”; they say, “Know that you are the ocean, then go on waving.” But then waving becomes a play.
Rooted thus in yoga, carry out your deeds.
These Upanishadic rishis were not lifelong brahmacharins, bachelors. They were not: they were married people, they had children, they had their families. They were not in any way negative; they had not renounced life, remember.
The whole thing became confused because of Buddha and Mahavira – they both renounced life. That too is a way, that too is a way to reach the divine, but because of this the whole Hinduism was misunderstood. And they were so significant, they were the most important revolutionaries in India, that even Hindus started thinking in their way. Buddha and Mahavira impressed the country so much; and they renounced life, they were negative. The negative is also a path.
There are two paths, negative and positive, and you have to choose. Either be totally positive, then you transcend; or be totally negative, then you transcend. Either trust life absolutely, then you go beyond life; or mistrust life absolutely, then also you go beyond life. These are the two paths, the two outgoing doors, the positive and negative – because these are the two poles. And remember, you can jump only from a pole, you cannot jump from the middle.
If I am to go out of this room I will have to find a polarity. I cannot jump from the middle of this room, I cannot go out from the middle. There is no way from the middle, I have to find the periphery, and from the periphery I can go out.
These are the two poles: life and death, negative and positive. Either affirm life, then you can jump out; or negate life, then you can jump out. If you affirm life then birth becomes the pole, if you deny life then death becomes the pole. Both Buddha and Mahavira were more interested in death than in birth. But Hinduism is not negative, and the Upanishads are not negative, they are affirmative.
Schweitzer became confused because of Buddha and Mahavira. Not only Schweitzer, even Hindus have become confused, because Buddha’s and Mahavira’s impact was so deep, and they impressed the whole country so much, that even Hindus had to think about it. And Shankara, one of the greatest Hindus ever born, became almost a Buddhist in the Hindu fold.
Shankara again impressed people very much. For these one thousand years he has been the soul of Hinduism – and he was just a Buddhist. Shankara’s enemies, Ramanuja, Nimbark and Vallabh, detected him. They said, “This man is not a Hindu at all; he just appears Hindu. He is a crypto-Buddhist, a hidden Buddhist.” And they were right.
Hinduism is totally different from Jainism and Buddhism. The difference, the basic difference, is that Hinduism affirms life. The rishis were not unmarried men, they were householders. They had not renounced, they never renounced anything. You cannot conceive of it. The whole thing has become so distant now, you cannot conceive of these rishis. They were living in life, but living as the ocean, not as the waves. They accepted everything.
Once it happened that King Janak declared that there was going to be a great debate, and whosoever won the debate would get a very big prize. The prize was a thousand beautiful cows with horns of gold, studded with diamonds. These one thousand cows were standing before the palace. All the scholars and pundits came, many people gathered in the hall. Whosoever won would take the cows.
Then came one of the most prominent rishis of that day with his disciples from his gurukul, from his ashram. And remember, those ashrams were not for brahmacharins only, those ashrams were household affairs. The guru lived with his wife and children and his disciples, and his disciples were absorbed into his family. Yajnavalkya came with his disciples, and he said to them, “Take these cows. I will take care of the debate later on” – absolutely affirmative!
These Upanishadic rishis lived life, but from a totally different standpoint, from a totally different center. They said, “Life is good, life is a blessing, and to allow the waves is a game, a beautiful game worth playing. And if God has given you the opportunity, play it to the full – but don’t get identified.”
Remember, this is a game. Remember, the earth is nothing but a drama, a great drama, and you are nothing more than actors. Remain a witness within and go on acting. There is no need to escape from actions. Even to think in terms of escape shows that you are afraid, and fear cannot lead you anywhere, only love.
And these rishis loved life. They loved everything that life can give; they loved all the blessings – and there are millions of blessings. They never said that life is dukkha, they never said that life is misery. They said that you can make life a misery, but life is not a misery. You can also make a bliss out of it – it is you, not life.
Rooted thus in yoga, carry out your deeds.

The mind of one who is thus rooted in yoga gradually withdraws from all desires, and the seeker feels blissful while engaging himself each day in meritorious acts. He has no interest whatsoever in the contrary efforts of the ignorant. He never betrays the secrets of one to another. He occupies himself solely with lofty deeds.

The mind of one who is thus rooted in yoga gradually withdraws from all desires.
Desires are not to be left; rather you have to be rooted in yoga, then you will withdraw by yourself and the happening will be spontaneous. There is no need to kill desires, there is no need to fight with desires; the only thing is to know your oceanic state, your Brahman state, the one, and then get rooted into it.
The more you are rooted in it, the less and less desires will be there. But you have not renounced them; rather on the contrary, they have left you, because desires become uninterested in one who is rooted in himself. Desires leave him, because now they are not welcome guests. If they come he accepts them, if they come he is not going to destroy them and fight with them – but he is not interested. He has higher blessings with him now, the lower don’t attract him. If they come he accepts, if they don’t come he never thinks about them. By and by the life energy moves more and more within, withinwards; desires disappear.
Remember this distinction: in Buddhism and Jainism, desires have to be left consciously, effort has to be made to leave them and when you leave them you will be rooted in yourself. In Hinduism it is just the contrary: get rooted in yourself and desires will leave you. Buddha is negative: leave the desires and you will be rooted in yourself. Hinduism is positive: be rooted in yourself and desires will leave you.
It works both ways – it depends on you. If you are a negative type, a person to whom no comes easily, then follow the negative path. There are persons to whom no comes first, even if they want to say yes. If no is easy to you nothing is wrong in it; you are a negative type, that’s all. Follow the negative path, say no to life so that you can get rooted in yourself. But if you are a yes type, then no is not your path. Then say yes to life, move with life, get rooted in yourself, and by and by desires will disappear.
And the seeker feels blissful while engaging himself each day in meritorious acts.
Whatsoever such a person does is meritorious, it is punya, it is holy, it is sacred. Whatsoever is done by one who is rooted in himself becomes worship, it is meritorious, because now he engages in it just as a play, just as a life-game. He is aware that it is only overflowing energy that moves into acts; he is not interested in doing anything or reaching any goal. His action is not work, his action is play – then the seeker feels blissful.
Whenever you are in play you feel blissful, and if your whole life becomes a play you cannot imagine how blissful you can become. Why do you feel blissful while you play? Even when playing cards you become blissful, the misery disappears. Why? When playing a game – football or hockey or anything – why do you become so blissful? Why do you feel so much joy bubbling in you? What happens?
And side by side with you there may be a professional player; he is not happy. He is not happy because he is just doing work. If you are paid for your card playing you will not be happy, because then you are not interested in the game, you are interested in the salary, and it has become a boredom. You have to do it to get the salary. Then the end is not in it, it is only a means.
This is the difference between work and play: work means the end is not in it, and you are interested in the end. If you can reach the end without this work, you would like to leave it. You have to carry it as a burden, it is a compulsion on you. Somehow you have to finish it and reach the goal.
Play is totally different; the end is in it, it is intrinsic. There is no goal, you are not going anywhere. You are enjoying the very thing. Think about it. A professional player becomes sad. It is something to be carried out, to be finished soon – the sooner the better.
The Upanishadic rishi is just the opposite. Even in profession he is a player; even in profession, in business, in whatsoever he is doing, in whatsoever life has created for him to do, he is a player, he goes on playing. He has no business to do, that’s why he is never busy. There is nothing to be done, there is no hurry. If everything is left unfinished there is no worry because it is okay, it was just a play, it ended in the middle – really there was no end to be achieved. This is the attitude of the positive path.
The seeker feels blissful while engaging himself each day in meritorious acts…. He performs only such gentle acts as do not disturb others.
When you are playing there is no need to hurt others, but when you are busy with a business you don’t care for others. Rather, you will use whatsoever means are to be used, even if the others are to be destroyed, because it is not a play, it is a serious business. Whosoever comes in your way has to be destroyed and thrown out of the way. In business you are violent, and a mind which is businesslike can never be nonviolent.
That’s why I go on saying that Gandhi cannot be nonviolent – he’s so businesslike. Even his nonviolence is a business, he is so serious about it. He is not in a play, he is deadly serious. That’s why he appealed to us so much: we are all businessmen and he was the supreme, the top. He appealed to us, he had appeal for everybody all over the earth, East or West. He appealed deeply, he appealed to the business mind. He was mathematical, calculating, serious with every penny – not in any way in a play.
He was not a Hindu, he could not be. He was ninety percent a Jaina and ten percent a Christian – negative, businesslike, serious. He was not like Krishna – playful, enjoying, nonserious. Whatsoever happens Krishna is not worried. He is not going to force anything on the course of life. Wherever life leads is the goal – wherever. If life leads to death in the middle of a stream, that is the goal – nowhere to reach.
A nonachieving mind is playful. An achieving mind, always thinking of achieving something, whether in this world or the other, is a business mind.
He performs only such gentle acts as do not disturb others.
When you are playing there is no need to disturb anybody. When you are playful you are nonviolent.
He fears sin, and does not crave any self-indulgence.
But the concept of sin in Hinduism is totally different from that of Christianity. Remember, the word pap, sin, has a different connotation. The Upanishads say that which is against the law is sin, just a natural phenomenon. Christianity says that which is disobedience to God is sin. This is absolutely different: disobedience to God.
In Christianity God is something like an aristocrat, something like a dictator; we can paint him just like Hitler or Mussolini. You disobey, and you will suffer and he will punish you. And he is very ferocious in punishment. For small sins, sometimes even when you are innocent, you will be thrown into hell. And Christianity says that it is forever and forever, the hell is eternal. That doesn’t seem to be justified. A small sin, falling in love with a woman, and you will suffer forever and forever.
And what did Adam do? – just a small disobedience; something that God prohibited. God said, “You are not to eat the fruit of this tree, the tree of knowledge. You can eat all the fruits available in this garden of Eden, but don’t come near this tree.”
And it is human to be attracted to something which is prohibited. Adam is so human and lovely, he must have become curious. If he was absolutely stupid, only then could he have followed. Even a little intelligence will say that something is there, otherwise why should God prohibit? If God had prohibited him from eating the snake, then Adam would have eaten the snake and been finished with the Devil. But he prohibited the fruit of the tree of knowledge, and then Adam was expelled from Eden because he disobeyed.
Christianity therefore is conformist; revolutionaries cannot be allowed. Adam was the first revolutionary. And why should God feel so offended for such a small thing? The Christian God cannot be playful. He is serious and ferocious, and he will take revenge. Hinduism cannot conceive of that: God taking revenge on innocent Adam who was just being curious. There was nothing else, he was just curious to know. And the Devil was able to persuade him. The Devil said, “God has prohibited you, because if you eat this fruit you will become God-like, and he is afraid and jealous.”
This is the sin in Christianity – disobedience. In Hinduism there is no question of disobedience or obedience. It is a simple natural law; just as water flows downwards, if you follow natural laws you will be happy. There is no one to decide it, it is a simple happening – if you follow natural laws you will be happy. If you don’t follow natural laws, you go against them, you will be unhappy. Nobody is taking any revenge, and you are not going to be thrown into eternal hell. If you don’t follow, for the time being you will suffer. Immediately you come back to the law the suffering stops.
A simple thing: if you put your hand in the fire you will be burned. No God is deciding, “I prohibit you. Don’t put your hand in the fire, otherwise I will take revenge.” Nobody is there, it is just the way fire behaves. You have to know that if you put your hand in you will suffer. Don’t put the hand in and you don’t suffer. And then you can use fire to heat the room, to cook food, and the fire be-comes your help – you can use it. Natural laws can be used if you know them well, flow with them; if you go against you suffer.
Sin is going against a natural law, not against any God. No one is giving you suffering, you are choosing it by moving wrongly. And no one is going to give you bliss, you will choose it by moving rightly. So it is not a question of good and bad, it is a question of right and wrong.
He utters loving and affectionate words. He lives in the company of saints and studies the scriptures. With complete unity of mind, speech and action, he follows them. Seeking to cross the ocean that is the world, he cultivates the above-mentioned ideas. And he is called a beginner, one performing his preliminaries. This is called the first stage.
Remember, all this is just the beginning, just the first step of creating the situation. This is not the end – just the preliminary, just the first step.

============================================================

Osho,
Need one be absolutely sure about a guru to become his disciple?
You can never be absolutely sure about a guru, and that is not needed. What is needed is that you should be absolutely sure about yourself. How can you be sure about a master? You exist on two different levels, two different states of mind. Whatsoever you can see, whatsoever you can understand, whatsoever you can interpret, will not be of much use – and there is more possibility of your going wrong than right. But there is no need, so don’t be worried about it.
You have to be sure about yourself, about your search, and if you are sure about yourself then you can devote yourself to a master totally. Remember, the totality of surrender is not going to come from the surety about the master; it is going to come from your own surety, your own totalness. The master is bound to remain paradoxical for you unless you yourself become enlightened, because only the same can understand the same.
Only when you have become a buddha will you be able to understand Buddha – never before. When you have become a christ, when Christ is known to you, you can understand; never before. Christ is bound to remain a mystery, and a mystery means paradox. Christ will appear to you as irrational, not because he is irrational but because he is supra-rational, he is beyond reason – and you don’t know anything about beyond reason. At the most you can think he is below reason, he is not rational. And the ways of a master are so secret that sometimes he will create a situation in which he will not allow you to be sure about himself, because if you can be absolutely sure about the master then your surrender is meaningless. Then what is the meaning of it? When you are absolutely sure of the master then it is a bargain, then you cannot do anything else other than surrender. When you are uncertain, then surrender is a device; in your uncertainty, hesitation, still you decide. That decision changes you.
The more mysterious a master, the more is the possibility of transformation through surrender. If the master is known to you, just as two plus two makes four, then there is no mystery. Sufi masters particularly will create rumors about themselves, so the new ones who come to them can only enter not because they are sure about the master, but because they are sure about their search – and they are ready to take a risk. Why do you want to be sure about the master? – because you don’t want to take the risk. Your mind is a business mind. When a master is something mysterious….
One old woman came from England to see Gurdjieff. She had heard Ouspensky, Gurdjieff’s disciple, and Ouspensky was a mathematician, a logician. He was not a master, he was not enlightened, but he was a perfect rationalist and he could explain Gurdjieff better than Gurdjieff himself. Gurdjieff would have remained unknown to the world if there had been no Ouspensky. He was nowhere near Gurdjieff, but he could think in a logical way, express in a logical way. He was professionally a mathematician. Many people were attracted to Ouspensky, and when they were attracted to Ouspensky they would start thinking about going to Gurdjieff – and then they would return frustrated, disappointed.
One old woman became very much impressed by Ouspensky, and then she went to see Gurdjieff. Within just a week she was back, and she told Ouspensky, “I can feel that Gurdjieff is great, but I am not certain whether he is good or bad, whether he is evil, devilish, or a saint. I am not certain about that. He is great – that much is certain. But he may be a great devil, or a great saint – that is not certain.” And Gurdjieff behaved in such a way that he would create this impression.
Alan Watts has written about Gurdjieff and has called him a rascal saint – because sometimes he would behave like a rascal, but it was all acting and was done knowingly to avoid all those who would take unnecessary time and energy. It was done to send back those who could only work when they were certain. Only those would be allowed who could work even when they were not certain about the master, but who were certain about themselves.
And to surrender to a Gurdjieff will transform you more than surrendering to Ramana Maharshi, because Ramana Maharshi is so saintly, so simple, that surrender doesn’t mean anything. You cannot do otherwise. He is so open – just like a small child – so pure, that surrender will happen. But that surrender is happening because of Ramana Maharshi, not because of you. It is nothing as far as you are concerned. If surrender happens with Gurdjieff, then it has happened because of you, because Gurdjieff is in no way going to support it. Rather, he will create all types of hindrances. If still you surrender, that transforms you. So there is no need to be absolutely sure about him – and that is impossible – but you have to be sure about yourself.
Just today one friend came to me and said about himself, “I am just fifty-fifty: fifty percent with you and fifty percent with Subud” – a very good Indonesian technique of meditation. So, “I am fifty-fifty, divided.”
I asked him, “What do you mean by fifty-fifty?” and told him one anecdote.

It happened once that Mulla Nasruddin owned a hotel. Then he was arrested and brought to the court of the town, because he was caught mixing horsemeat in chicken cutlets. But he confessed and he said, “I have been committing this crime,” and he pleaded guilty.
The magistrate asked, “Nasruddin, will you tell me what the proportion was? How much horsemeat were you mixing into how many chicken cutlets?”
Nasruddin said, very truthfully, “Fifty-fifty.”
But the magistrate was not convinced so he asked, “What do you mean by fifty-fifty, Nasruddin?”
Nasruddin said, “It is so obvious. Fifty-fifty means fifty-fifty – one horse to one chicken.”

So it is not certain. What do you mean by fifty-fifty? Your mind is confusion, but division will not help, a divided mind will not be of much help. Go to Subud or come to me, but be a hundred percent. And that hundred percentness is needed about you – not about me, or about Bapak Subud, or about anybody else. You must be a hundred percent here, then work becomes possible.
What to do? Your mind is cunning – clever, you call it, but it is cunning. It calculates, it cannot take a risk. That’s why you have been wandering for so many lives. You were near Buddha, you were near Jesus, you have seen Mohammed – you have seen many masters, but you bypass them just because of your cleverness. Your cleverness is your stupidity. Even with a Buddha you calculate – and what can you calculate? Life is such a mystery; it cannot be explained in terms of logic. And a person like Buddha is so mysterious that whatsoever you come to conclude will be wrong, and by the time you have concluded Buddha will have changed. By the time you have come to a decision, Buddha is not the same – because Buddha is a river, a riverlike phenomenon, flowing. Conclusion will take time, and you will miss.
Religion is for those who are like gamblers, who can take risks. If you are a gambler then something can happen, but if you are a businessman then nothing is possible. Be certain about your search. If you are really in search, then don’t be afraid. And I say again: even with a master who is false, pseudo, you are not going to lose anything.

It happened that one of the Tibetan mystics, Marpa, was in search of a master. He reached a master who was not really a master, who was a pseudo-teacher, who was not himself enlightened. Marpa asked him, “What am I supposed to do?”
The pseudo-master said, “You will have to surrender to me. Surrender totally.”
Marpa said, “Surrendered! I am surrendered. Now what is to be done?”
Other disciples became jealous, because this Marpa seemed to be a dangerous man: immediately, without arguing, without discussing, he said, “I have surrendered. Now tell me, what is to be done?” He would become the leader, he would become the chief disciple – he had already become it. He had just arrived, and they had been serving the master for many years, and he had superseded them.
They became jealous, and they said to the master, “This is not easy; surrender is such a difficult thing. For many years we have been working, and yet we have not surrendered totally. This man seems to be deceiving. So we must examine whether the surrender is true or not.”
The master asked, “How can it be examined and tested?”
So they said, “Tell him to jump from this hill into the valley. If he jumps, then he is surrendered. If he doesn’t jump, then he is deceiving.” In both ways they were thinking that they were going to be the winners. If he jumped he would be dead; if he didn’t jump he would be thrown out of the ashram.
But they didn’t know Marpa – he simply jumped. And they were wonderstruck. He jumped – and then he was sitting in the valley! So when they reached him they could not believe it; even the master could not believe that this could happen. So he thought, “It must have been just an accident that he is saved.”
He asked Marpa, “How did it happen?”
He said, “I don’t know. You must know; I have surrendered to you. Now it is up to you. I don’t know what has happened – but a miracle has happened. You have done this!”
The master knew well that he had not done anything – he did not know any a b c – this must have been by accident. So another situation had to be created.
Then they saw a house that was on fire, so they said, “Enter!” Marpa entered immediately. The whole house burned, and they could not know what had happened until the fire disappeared.
Then they went inside. All over the place everything was burned, everything was destroyed and Marpa was sitting in meditation, not even perspiring. So the master asked, “Marpa, how did you do it again?”
He said, “I don’t know, master. It is you. And my trust is growing; you are a miracle!”
But it is possible that even an accident can happen a second time, improbabilities are also possible. So they thought, “It has to be tried again, a third time.” So they told Marpa to walk on a river. The river was in flood and they said, “Walk on water!” And Marpa walked.
When Marpa was walking and was just in midstream, the master thought, “It seems as if I am doing something, because how can this happen? It must be my power.” He thought, “If just by surrendering to me Marpa can walk on water, why cannot I walk?” So he started walking – and he was drowned.
No one has ever heard about what happened to that master, but Marpa became enlightened.

So it is not a question of the master, it is a question of your totality. Even with a pseudo-master you can become enlightened. And the reverse is also true: even with an enlightened master you may remain ignorant. Remember, my emphasis is on you. That’s why I never say: Don’t go to Sai Baba, or: Don’t go to Bapak Subud. That is immaterial. Go anywhere. Go totally.

The second question:
Osho,
You often tell stories of persons who went into aloneness in some forest and who became silent and peaceful there. But aloneness seems to make most modern persons anxious and depressed, and it creates a yearning for human companionship. Instead of the patterned mind dropping, we become more acutely aware of it and preoccupied with it. How to overcome this? How can we learn to enjoy long periods of aloneness, and drop the old mind in it?
This is nothing new for the modern mind; this has been always so. Mind cannot exist in aloneness; to be alone means mind will have to commit suicide. Mind becomes anxious – it is a murder. Whenever you go alone, the mind cannot exist in that aloneness.
Mind can exist only in the society; mind is a social phenomenon, others are needed for it. You cannot be angry when alone, or if you become angry you will feel very foolish; you cannot be sad when alone, because there is no excuse; you cannot be violent when alone, because the other is needed; you cannot talk, you cannot go on chattering. You cannot use the mind, the mind cannot function – and when mind cannot function it becomes anxious, worried. It needs functioning, it needs someone to communicate to.
Mind is a social phenomenon, a societal byproduct. And it has always been so. Even when Svetaketu went into the forest, he was anxious, he was worried, he was depressed in the beginning. The difference is not in the mind; the difference is in patience. The mind remains the same, modern or old, but in the old days people were more patient, they could wait. You are not patient –that is the problem. They were not time conscious and you are time conscious.
In the old days in the ancient world, particularly in the East, there was no time consciousness. That’s why watches and clocks were not invented in the East. There was more possibility for their invention in China than in India, because they had done many things and it was possible to invent clocks, to measure time, but they were not interested in time. The modern mind is too interested in time. Why? This is a part of the Christian influence on the world. With Christianity and Islam time consciousness entered into the world. There are reasons for it.
In the East it has been believed always that life goes on forever and ever, it is eternal, it is timeless – so there is no hurry; you will be again and again. Millions of times you were here and millions of times you will be again here; there is no hurry. This life is not the last nor the first, it is a long procession, and you are al-ways in the middle – there is no beginning and no end. So there can be no hurry about time; enough time, more than enough, is available.
With Christianity there is only one life – this is the first and the last. Once you die you don’t have any time any more; so you have a life span of seventy years at the most. There is so much to do, and so little time with you. That’s why in the West there is so much hurry; everyone is running because life is going. Every moment life is becoming less and less. Time is passing, you are dying, and you have so many desires to fulfill and no time to fulfill them, so anxiety is created.
In the East it was totally different. It is said in one of the Tibetan scriptures that even if you have to go in a hurry, go slowly. Even if you have to go in a hurry, go slowly. It is said that if you run you will never reach; if you sit you can reach, but if you run you will miss. An eternal procession, many lives, millions of lives, enough time – patience was possible.
In the West only one life, and every moment life changing into death; nothing is fulfilled, no desire completed, everything incomplete – how can you be patient? How can you wait? Waiting has become impossible. With the idea of one life, and with another idea of linear time, Christianity has created anxiety in the mind; and now Christianity has become a global influence.
Christianity says that time is not moving in a circle, it is moving in a straight line. Nothing is going to be repeated again, so everything is unique. Every event is once and for all, it cannot be repeated. It is not a circle; it is not like a wheel of a cart moving where every spoke will come again, where again and again the same spoke will be repeated.
In the East time is a circular concept, just like seasons moving in a circle. The summer comes and then the summer will come again, and it has been so always and it will be so always. And the Eastern concept is nearer to truth than the Western, because every movement is in a circle. The earth moves in a circle, the sun moves in a circle, the stars move in a circle, the life moves in a circle – every movement is circular. So time cannot be an exception; if time moves at all, it moves in a circle. The linear concept of time is absolutely wrong.
That’s why in the East we were never interested in history. We have been interested in myth, but never in history. The West introduced history into the world. That’s why Jesus became the center of history, the beginning of the calendar. We go on measuring time with “before Christ,” “after Christ.” Christ became the center of all history, the first historic person.
Buddha is not historic, Krishna is not at all; you can never be certain whether really Krishna was ever born or not, whether the whole thing was just a story or a history. But the East was never worried about it. They say everything is a story, and it has been told many times and will be told again and again. There is no need to be concerned with facts, because facts are repetitive. It is better to be concerned with the theme, not with the facts – so you may not be able to understand many things.
It is said that before Rama was born, one of the avatars of India, Valmiki, wrote his story – before he was born! It is impossible. How can you write the history when the man is not yet born? But Valmiki wrote first, and then Rama had to follow his story, whatsoever he had said. How did it happen? This is mysterious, but not mysterious at all if you look at the Eastern concept of time.
Valmiki says, “I know Rama, because in many ages he has been born before – I know the very theme. So I create the story, because I know the theme, I know the essential. The nonessential I will put in the story.”
And Rama must have thought, “Why contradict Valmiki? Why contradict this old man? Follow it.” And he followed.
The East lives in myth; myth means a repetitive theme, the essential is always there. In the West myth is meaningless. If you can prove that something is a myth it becomes meaningless. You have to prove that it is history, it has happened in time; you have to be exact about it.
This linear concept of nonrepetitive life creates anxiety, so when you go into silence, alone, you become worried. One thing is: time is wasted. You are not doing anything, you are just sitting. Why are you wasting your life? And this time cannot be regained, because they go on teaching in the West: Time is wealth. It is absolutely wrong, because wealth is created by scarcity, and time is not scarce. The whole economics depends on scarcity: if something is scarce it becomes valuable. Time is not scarce, it is there always. You cannot finish it; it will always be there – so time cannot be economic. It is not scarce; it cannot be wealth.
But we go on teaching, “Time is wealth – don’t waste it. Once wasted it never comes again.” So if you go into aloneness and then you sit there, you cannot sit there for three years, you cannot sit there for three months, even three days are too much – you have wasted three days.
And what are you doing? The second problem arises – because in the West being is not very valuable, doing is valuable. They ask, “What have you done?” – because the time has to be used in doing something. They say in the West that a vacant mind is the devil’s workshop. And you know it, in the mind you also know it, so when you are sitting alone you become afraid. Wasting time, not doing anything, you go on questioning yourself, “What are you doing here? Just sitting? Wasting?” – as if just being is a wastage! You have to do something to prove that you have utilized your time. This is the difference.
In the old ancient days, in the East particularly, just to be was enough; there was no need to prove anything else. No one was going to ask, “What have you done?” Your being was enough and accepted. If you were silent, peaceful, blissful, it was okay. That’s why in the East we never demanded from sannyasins that they should work – no, no need. And we always thought that sannyasins, those who had left all working, were better than those who were occupied in work.
This cannot be done in the West. If you are not working you are a vagabond, a bum. Hippies are a very new phenomenon. The East has always been hippie-oriented. We have created the greatest hippies of the world – a Buddha, a Mahavira: not doing anything, just sitting and meditating, enjoying their being, just being blissful as they are, not doing anything. But we respected them – they were the supreme, the highest, the most respectable. Buddha was begging, but even kings had to come to bow to his feet.

Once it happened that Buddha was passing through a village, and the chief minister of the king of that locality told the king, “Buddha is coming, so we will have to go to receive him and touch his feet and pay our respects.”
The king said, “But is it necessary for a beggar? He is just a beggar, and I am a great king. Why should I go and respect him and bow down to him? If he wants to see me, he can come and take an appointment with me.”
The old chief minister, who was a very wise man, immediately gave in his resignation. He said, “If this is the case then I cannot remain here for a single moment.”
The king was worried, because this man was much too valuable to be lost, so he said, “But why?”
The old man said, “This is absolutely wrong. You may be a great king, you may become the emperor of the whole earth, but you cannot become greater than Buddha. He has left all kingdoms, and you are still obsessed with wealth, riches, prestige, power. He has left all of them, he has nothing, and only a person who has nothing is the highest, because he doesn’t desire. You will have to go and respect him, otherwise take my resignation. I cannot remain in this unholy palace for a single moment.” The king had to go.

The East was totally different; a different milieu was there. Being was respect-ed. No one was going to ask, “What have you done?” Everyone was just asking, “What are you?” Enough! If you were silent, peaceful, loving; if compassion was there; if you had flowered – enough! Then it was society’s duty to help and serve you. No one would say you should work, or you should create something, you should be creative. In the East they thought that to be oneself is the highest creativity, and the presence of such a man was valuable. He could go into silence for years.
Mahavira was in silence for twelve years. He would not speak, he would not go into villages, he would not see anybody. And when he started speaking, somebody asked him, “Why were you not speaking before?”
He said, “Speech becomes valuable only when you have attained silence, otherwise it is futile – not only futile, dangerous also, because you are throwing rubbish into others’ heads. So this was my effort: that I would speak only when talking had completely stopped inside. When the inner talk had disappeared, only then would I speak. Then it is not a disease.”
And they could wait, because the East believed in reincarnation. They could wait. There are stories that a disciple would come to the master and wait for thirty years, would not ask anything but just wait for the master to ask, “For what have you come?” Thirty years is too much – one life completely wasted – but waiting for thirty years will do the work.
People from the West come to me and they say, “This very evening we are leaving, so give us some key. How can we become silent? But we don’t have any time to stay – we must go.” They are thinking in terms with which they have become acquainted – instant coffee – so they think there must be some instant meditation, a key I can hand over to them and it is finished. No, there is no key. It is a long effort, it is a deep patience. And the more you are in a hurry, the longer it will take. So remember this: if you are not in any hurry it may happen this very moment. When you are not in a hurry the quality of mind is there, silence is there.

I will tell you one story. Once it happened that two monks were traveling. They crossed a river in a boat, and the ferryman said to them, “Where are you going? If you are going to the city beyond this valley, go slowly.”
But the old monk said, “If we go slowly we will never reach, because we have heard that the gates of that city are closed after sunset, and we have just one or two hours at the most, and it is a very long distance. If we go slowly we will never reach, and we will have to wait outside the city. And the outside of the city is dangerous – wild animals and everything – so we will have to make haste.”
The ferryman said, “Okay, but this is my experience: those who go slowly, reach.”
The other monk listened to it. He was a young man and he thought, “I don’t know this part of the country, and this ferryman may be right, so it is better to follow his advice.” So he walked slowly, leisurely, as if not going anywhere, not in a hurry, just for a walk.
The old man hurried, started running. He had many scriptures on his back. Then he fell down: tired, carrying weight, old, and in such a hurry, so tense, he fell down. The man who was not in a hurry simply walked and reached.
The ferryman was coming and he came near the old man. He was lying by the side of the road; his leg was broken and blood was oozing out. The ferryman said, “I told you that this has been always so: those who walk slowly reach, those who are in a hurry always manage to stumble somewhere or other. These parts are dangerous. The road is rough and you are an old man. And I had advised you, but you wouldn’t listen to me.”

This is one of the Korean Zen stories, and this is how it is in life. Go slowly, patiently, not in a hurry, because the goal is not somewhere else – it is within you. When you are not in a hurry you will feel it; when you are in a hurry you cannot feel it because you are so tense. If you are not going anywhere at all, then you can feel it more immediately.
In Japan meditation is called zazen. Zazen means simply sitting and not doing anything. So Zen priests, monks, have to sit for six hours a day or even more; the master never gives them anything to do, they have just to sit. They have trained themselves for just sitting, not asking for anything to do, not even a mantra – just sitting.
It is very arduous. It looks easy but is very arduous, because the mind asks for some work, something to be done. And the mind goes on saying, “Why? Why waste time? Why just go on sitting? What is going to happen by just sitting?” But for three years, or even more, the seeker sits. Then, by and by, the mind drops asking. It is useless now, you don’t listen to it. It has got fed up with you, so the mind stops asking. By and by, when the mind is not asking, you start realizing a new life force within you which was always there but you were so occupied you couldn’t listen to it, you couldn’t feel it. Unoccupied, you start feeling it.
Mind has always been creating problems and loneliness. Go in aloneness at least for three months, and decide beforehand that whatsoever happens you are not going to listen to the mind. Decide beforehand that you are ready to waste three months, so there is no need to think again and again that you are wasting time. You have decided that you are going to waste three months, and you are not going to do anything – you will simply sit and wait. A miracle is possible.
Just within these three months, some day suddenly you will become aware of your being. When there is no doing you become aware of being. When there is too much doing you go on forgetting the being which is hidden behind.

The third question:
Osho,
I feel very devoted to you, and since being with you my life has transformed very much. In my heart I feel you are my master. For the first time I feel a contentment with my outer life and my relationships with others, and there is no desire for anything external. But an inner yearning for the ever elusive enlightenment and bliss remains, and I cannot do anything to stop that desire. Is this a barrier? Isn't it likely to remain until the reality is realized, however?
Yes, it is a barrier, because there is no question of any desire, whether for external things or for internal things. Desire is the same, there is no distinction, so don’t divide desire, and don’t say, “No more are worldly desires within me, but the otherworldly desire is there.” The otherworldly desire is as worldly as any worldly desire – desire is worldly. So don’t divide, don’t play tricks.
Objects of desire are not significant; desiring is significant. You can desire wealth, you can desire God – desiring remains the same, only the object has changed. You can desire a palace here, you can desire a palace in paradise – objects have changed, but the desire remains the same. You can desire anything whatsoever, desire will be the same. Remember this.
And with desire you cannot attain realization. Desire has to be dropped. So what to do? Really there is nothing to do. You have to realize more and more that your desire creates suffering. Now this new desire is creating suffering. Before there were other desires; you have left those desires, so you feel contentment, you feel peaceful with life. Your relationships have become more loving because desires have disappeared from that field.
Now be aware: when there were desires in that field you were not content. You were frustrated, you were filled with jealousy, anger, hatred; relationship was difficult, it was suffering and misery. Now desire has left that field; that field has become peaceful. So become aware that now you are creating a new suffering: when will this enlightenment happen? And unless it happens you cannot be content. How can you be content unless you become a buddha? So, “When will I become a buddha?”
One Buddhist, Nagarjuna, is reported to have said that the desire to become a buddha is the greatest barrier to becoming a buddha – because unless you stop desiring to become a buddha you will not come to know that you are already a buddha. This desiring dissolves and your buddhahood appears; it is there. So now feel this new misery which is coming into being with the new desire.
Every desire brings misery. There is nothing to be done –simply become aware that every desire brings misery. If you realize this, desires will disappear; internal or external, no desires are needed. When there is no desire you have achieved. Then this very moment is ecstasy; then right here and now you have become the goal. There can be no misery then. But don’t make this distinction. Mind is so cunning, it goes on deceiving you. It says, “Okay, if worldly desires create misery, leave them. I will be content with nonworldly desires.” So the object changes, but the desiring remains the same.

I will tell you one anecdote. I have heard, it happened in New Delhi that a netaji, a great political leader, dragged Mulla Nasruddin to the court. That great leader, the netaji, said to the court, “This man, Mulla Nasruddin, has insulted me in public. He has called me a donkey.”
That political leader was a powerful man. The magistrate said to Nasruddin, “This is not good. You will have to be punished.”
Nasruddin said, “I was not aware that it is an offense to call a leader a donkey. I was not aware. So forgive me, and I give you my promise that I will never do it again.” So he was forgiven, and even the political leader was satisfied.
Then Nasruddin asked the magistrate, “But if I call a donkey netaji, leader, have you any objection?”
The magistrate laughed and he said, “There is no objection – unless the donkey comes to the court, and I hope no donkey will come. If you feel good, and if you like it, you can call any donkey netaji. We don’t have any objection to it.”
Mulla Nasruddin turned immediately towards the netaji and said, “Netaji, how are you?”

The mind remains the same. It goes on changing objects, but the inner quality persists. So whether you call a leader a donkey, or you call a donkey a leader, it makes no difference – you will have to stop calling.
So a desire for the outer, or a desire for the inner, is just a change of the object – the mind remains the same. Drop it. As you have dropped the outer desire, you can drop the inner also. And you know now that just by dropping the outer you are feeling a deep contentment with yourself. So why carry this new desire? Drop it also.
When you drop all desire, you have become paradise itself. Then you are the heaven, you are the moksha. With desires you are destroying it; with desires you are so occupied you cannot be in contact with your own deepest center, your own deepest depth.

The last question:
Osho,
This morning you said that the Upanishadic sages had a positive approach towards life, and that Buddha and Mahavira had a negative approach towards life. Which is Your approach – affirmation or negation of life? Which approach would You have Your disciples take?
I have got no approach – or, both are mine. I don’t divide. To me, the positive can also lead to the same goal as the negative, so I don’t say that the positive is the only approach, and I don’t say that the negative is the only approach. Both are approaches, and both are as good as each other.
My emphasis is not on the approach, my emphasis is on the disciple. So I don’t say that you should follow this or that wholesale. I would like you to decide whether you have a negative mind or a positive mind. If you have a positive mind then follow the positive approach; if you have a negative mind then follow the negative approach. And there are both types of people here.
That’s why Hinduism cannot be a world religion, Buddhism cannot be a world religion. Up till now there exists no religion which can be a world religion, because every religion chooses one approach. Whatsoever I am saying can be a world-comprehensive thing, because I don’t choose any approach. All approaches lead to the same goal. The goal is important, and the disciple who is to travel is important – the path is irrelevant. And both types exist.
Remember, there are males and females, and their number on the earth re-mains almost equal. This is a miracle: biologists cannot explain how it happens that man and woman remain in equal numbers on the earth. And if sometimes the balance is lost, immediately the balance is regained. For example, in a war the balance is lost because more men are killed than women. Immediately after the war more boys are born than girls. How this happens has been a mystery for biology – but the number of men and women remain equal.
The mystery is because of the polarity: man is one pole of life and woman is the other pole of life. If a man is born, immediately a woman is born, because the other pole has to be there; without the other pole this magnet cannot exist. So whenever there are wars and more men are killed, immediately more men will be born. Ordinarily also, more boys are born than girls. The proportion is this: one hundred and fifteen boys are born to one hundred girls, because boys are weaker than girls, and by the time they are sexually mature fifteen boys will have died. So by the age of sexual maturity the number will be equal – fifteen boys will have died.
Girls don’t die so easily, they are stronger. And it is a fallacy created by men, male chauvinists, that man is the stronger sex. This is a fallacy, woman is the stronger sex. In every way she is stronger. She is ill less than man, she goes mad less than man, she lives longer than man. The average life-expectancy of women all over the world, in every country, is five years more than men. If men live to be seventy-five, women are going to live to be eighty. And they die less in childhood – fifteen percent less. They are the stronger sex.
And this is how it should be, because they have to do the greatest creativity of this life – give birth. It is such a long suffering, a tapascharya, a sadhana, to give birth. Just think, if man had to give birth the world would have disappeared. Just think, for nine months carrying a baby in your stomach. It is impossible to conceive of man doing that and then bringing up the child. No man would be ready for it. He is weak.
Wherever the balance is lost it is immediately regained. Why? – because man and woman are a polarity. There is a myth in India, a Jaina myth, which you may not have heard, and I think it is very probable that sometime it may have been true. In Jaina Puranas, in Jaina mythology, it is said that in the beginning only twins were born, never a single child: twins, one boy and one girl. And they were to be married – brother and sister, twins.
In the beginning, millions of years ago in the past, only twins were born, a boy and a girl. They were the natural wife and husband, and the world was very peaceful. It must have been, because if you could get a natural wife and a natural husband, life would be totally different – because it is always the wrong person that you choose. It is so difficult to choose a right wife and a right husband – almost impossible! How can you choose?
Just think of another thing: if you had had to choose the right father and the right mother it would have been impossible. Where to choose and how to choose? And whosoever you had chosen, you would have felt frustrated in the end. But nature chooses for you, so the mother and father are always almost okay; you cannot do anything about it.
The Jaina myth says that wife and husband were born as twins. They were naturally related; they had a harmony, the deep harmony of twins. There was never a conflict between them; they behaved as two bodies and one soul. Jainas say that those were the peaceful days in the world. When that harmony was disturbed everything was disturbed. That’s possible, and I think it can become again possible. Science may be helpful in the coming century to create this possibility again – then the pole is born with you. But whether the pole is born with you or not, the pole is born simultaneously somewhere: a boy is born, a girl is born somewhere; a girl is born, a boy is born somewhere.
The same polarity exists between the positive mind and the negative. When-ever there is a positive mind, just by the side of it there is a negative mind. That number is always equal. So in the world, half are always Hindus and half Buddhists – or you can name it in another way, but half are positive persons and half are negative persons.
I don’t choose anything. If someone comes to me and says, “Which is right, man or woman?” I will say both are right, because neither can exist separately – their harmony is right. So if you ask me, “Which is right, positive or negative?” I say both are right, because neither can exist without the other – their harmony is right. That’s why my statements seem so contradictory, because sometimes I am talking with a positive person; then I have to make totally different statements. Sometimes I am talking to a disciple who is negative; then I have to make absolutely contradictory statements. And when they both meet, they will be confused.
So remember, whenever I say something to you, I have said it to you. Don’t listen to anybody else; this is personal. Whenever I have said something to you, I have said it to you, and if somebody says that I have said something contradictory to him, don’t listen. I may have said it…because to me approaches are not important, persons are important.
I do not have a fixed approach. When a different type of person comes to me, I immediately change my approach. I always adjust to the person, I never try the reverse – I never try to adjust the person to an approach. To me that looks absurd. I don’t make readymade clothes for you and then say, “Cut your legs a little because the dress….” I always cut the dress immediately if I feel it doesn’t suit you. The dress is wrong, you are never wrong.
Then there are bound to be many contradictions – but I contain contradictions. To me they only appear contradictory; they are joined together just like man and woman, positive and negative, day and night, life and death. Both approaches are mine. That’s why I go on talking about Buddha with as much love as I go on talking about Patanjali or Lao Tzu or Jesus or Mahavira or Mohammed.
I contain all.
Remember that – that will help you to be less confused.

============================================================

Now follow the traits of seekers of the second stage,
called the stage of thought.

He lives in the care of learned men who explain best what
listening, remembering, right conduct, contemplation –
dharana – and meditation are. Having acquired knowledge of such scriptures as are worth listening to, he efficiently discriminates between what is duty and what is not, and he knows well the division between a word and the thing it symbolizes.
His mind does not suffer from an excess of conceit, pride, greed and attachment, although externally they are apparent to some extent.
He gives up his external impurities as a snake casts off its slough.
Such a seeker acquires the actual
knowledge of all these things with the grace of the scriptures,
the guru, and the sages.
The first stage for the seeker is to create a milieu around himself of the feeling that the ocean is real and waves are just superficial surface phenomena. To live in that oceanic feeling is the first stage. This becomes the soil. Unless this milieu is there, there is no possibility of any growth into the higher realms of being. So remember this: you must be aware more and more of the center, less and less of the surface; more and more aware of the depth, and less and less aware of the circumference. The focus must change from the periphery to the innermost core.
If you continue being involved with the surface you cannot penetrate to the ultimate being, because the ultimate being, Brahman – or you may call it the truth or God or whatsoever you like – the ultimate being is the center of existence. And we exist on the periphery.
This is natural in a way, because whenever you come in contact with something, you come in contact with the periphery, the outermost. This is natural. But don’t remain there – move ahead, move further. Leave the periphery be-hind and go deep. With everything – with a rock, with a man, with a tree, with whatsoever – always remember that the surface is the outermost body, and this is not the whole. The whole illusion consists of thinking of the surface as the whole.
The surface belongs to the whole, there is nothing wrong in it; but when you get this impression, this identity that the surface is the whole, then there is no possibility of inner growth because then you have to stay with the surface – the surface has become the whole. Don’t allow the surface to become the whole. This is not something which is going against the surface; this is simply going with the truth, with the reality.
The surface will be there. When you have conceived the whole, the surface will be there, but in its right place. Nothing is to be eliminated, only a greater perspective is needed. And when your perspective has become total, everything will be there. This world will be there; whatsoever you have will be there, but in a new harmony, in a new gestalt.
This is something to be understood very deeply, because it happens to persons who are on a religious search that either they get identified with the surface, or they become against it. Then they start thinking that this world is to be negated, the world of the waves has to be denied. Either they think that waves are the ocean, or they move to the opposite pole: they start saying that the waves are illusory, that they are not, that they have to be denied. Both standpoints are wrong. From one wrong polarity, if you jump to the other, the other is bound to be wrong. The truth is somewhere in between, in the middle.
Don’t jump from the waves to the ocean, but rather from the waves and the ocean to just in the middle from where you can see both – the ocean and the waves also. Then your life becomes a synthesis, and when your life is a synthesis the music of the divine is created.
The Upanishads are not against the world. They are for Brahman, but they are not against the world. Their Brahman includes everything, the Brahman is inclusive. This is the first state.
Now follow the traits of seekers of the second stage, called the stage of thought.
The first stage is the stage of feeling, feeling that Brahman surrounds you, everywhere is Brahman. And remember, the seeker has to start from the feeling, from the heart, because only the heart can be the base. The heart is the base of your body, and the heart is going to be the base of your divine body also.
If you go to the physiologist he will say, “Yes, there is a heart, but that heart is only physiological, just a pumping system; nothing more is there – no love, no feeling,” because he dissects the body and he comes only to know the body and the bodily. But everybody, even that physiologist, when in love will put his hand on his heart. If he is frustrated in his love, then he will feel a deep ache in his heart. He cannot explain it. As a physiologist he will say, “This is illusory,” but as a man he also feels the same. And remember, a physiologist is just a specialization, a fragment; man is the whole.
So don’t listen to the physiologist, listen to his totality. When he is in love he feels his heart is filled, something has poured into it, he has become heart-full. We don’t have such a thing, not even such a word – heartful. We say that a man is healthy, healthful; we say a man is mannerly, mannerful – but we never say a man is heartful, or loveful. These words must be created, because these are existential facts. When you are in love, you are heartful, loveful, overflooded, and of that overflooded feeling the heart is the center.
When you are in love, close your eyes and feel where your feeling has its center. It can never be in the head; it is impossible. It can never be anywhere else – it will be just in the heart. The heart is the base of your body, and it is going to be the base of your higher body also. That’s why the Upanishads say that the first stage is of feeling. Thought is not denied, thought has to take its own place – but that is the second stage.
When feeling is there, then thought cannot go wrong. If feeling is not there, thought is bound to go wrong. If you follow thought without feeling, you will become destructive. That’s what happened with Hitler, with Mussolini, with Tojo; that’s what is happening every day with Mao, with all the dictators – the thought is leading them. The heart has been silenced, or as if cut off from their being; there is only thought, and then thought can be destructive.
Hitler thought that it would be good and a compassionate act if all weaklings were destroyed: no weak person should exist on the earth. It was logical, be-cause these weaklings create problems. These weaklings give birth to more weaklings, they destroy the whole purity of humanity. This is logical – but just logical. If you ask Buddha, he will say that the weakling has to be supported: the strong should serve the weak, and that is his strength; otherwise for what is his strength needed? The stronger the person, the more he will serve the weak – but this comes from the heart. Then service itself becomes the strongest thing in your personality.
But if you think from the mind only, then weaklings have to be destroyed because they are the deterioration; through them humanity will deteriorate, will fall down. The ill have to be destroyed because through them illness will spread more. The mad have to be killed because through them madness will be spread all over the world. This is logical; nothing is wrong in it as a mathematical argument – and that’s what Hitler tried to follow. He killed millions of beings.
You cannot argue with him logically; he is exactly right that the weak should be destroyed. But then what is strength? If all the weaklings are destroyed, where will be the strong? And if this logic is continued to its climax, then only one person can exist on the earth – the strongest – because all others will be weaklings in comparison to him. So if you go on destroying the weak, then only one person can exist, not even two. This is the conclusion of the logic. And then what is that one person going to do? And what is the meaning of his life? For whom is he going to exist?
Life has the deepest secret, and that is this: that when you exist for someone you exist for the first time. And if your existence becomes a service to many it becomes richer. When you exist only for yourself you exist uselessly; there is no significance, no meaning. The moment you start existing for someone, your existence becomes meaningful, significant, for the first time. That is the meaning of service. But that service can be based only on the heart; it cannot be based on thought.
But that doesn’t mean that the Upanishads deny thinking. They don’t deny; they say thought has much to do, but it must follow feeling. The mind must follow heart, only then can it be good. Then it cannot go wrong because the heart will always guide in the right direction. The heart becomes the compass – and the heart has the center of love, and love cannot lead you wrongly.
It happened once, a man came to Saint Augustine and he said, “What should I do? And tell me in short, because I am an illiterate person and I cannot understand great theological things. So just in short, simply, so that I can understand and remember it, just tell me the essence of religion.”
Saint Augustine is reported to have said, “Love, and then all else will follow. And don’t bother about anything else.”
If you love you cannot do wrong. The more you love the more it becomes impossible to do wrong – love cannot go wrong. But your love goes wrong. That simply means that your love is not love. Your love even creates hell, misery; you even become destructive to your lover. Move into any family and you will feel the destruction that love has brought: wife and husband continuously fighting, quarreling, trying to dominate each other, trying to possess each other – really trying to destroy the other.
The wife wants the husband just to be a thing, not a person. The husband wants the wife just to be a thing to be possessed; a beautiful thing of course, but a thing, not a person – because a person needs freedom to be, only a thing can be made totally a slave. A person can never be made a slave, and the more you make a slave of him the less he is a person. And this is happening through love! And Augustine says, Buddha says, Jesus says, “Love, and everything will be right. Love, and you will be on the right path.” Your love is not love.
The more I try to understand people who are in love, the more I see that their love is just a form of hate. They disguise it, they think it is love, but their thinking cannot be believed, because the results show something else. And a tree is known by its fruits, not by the declaration. The tree may declare, there may be a big sign on the tree, a signboard saying “This is an apple tree,” but it is to be known by the fruits. If apples never come the signboard is not worth anything, it is lying. If love gives one the direction towards divineness, then your love cannot be called love because it leads into misery.
Oscar Wilde has written in his memoirs, “This has been my problem my whole life: I cannot live without a woman, and I cannot live with a woman. If I live with a woman it creates hell; if I don’t live with a woman that creates hunger and starvation and I feel I should have a woman.” You cannot live with a woman, and you cannot live without a woman. What is the problem? The problem is that love has to be learned. Love is a creative art; one is not born with the capacity to love, no one is born with the capacity to love. Love is a growth, an achievement, and the finest achievement possible.
It is just like music: no one is born playing an instrument, you have to learn it. And the more complex the instrument, the longer it will take. Someone asked Godowsky, “Now you have become a great master of music, a maestro, do you still practice?”
He said, “Yes, if I don’t practice for a single day, I notice things are going wrong. If I don’t practice for two days, then experts in my audience notice something is going wrong. And if I don’t practice for three days, everybody becomes aware that something is going wrong.” Eight hours per day he was practicing when he was a world famous maestro.
And love is the greatest music, and you have to play it upon the most complex instrument – the lover or the beloved. You think you are born with the capacity, so you destroy the instrument. You fall in love with a woman, but you don’t know that that woman is the most complex instrument in the world. You are going to destroy, and when the woman is destroyed she becomes chaotic, she becomes chaos – anger and hatred are bound to be there.
Love has to be learned as an art, the greatest art, the art of life. That’s why we go on talking about love, but love is the most scarce thing on this earth. It happens only once; millions of people are in love and it happens only once – one in a million becomes capable of love. There are reasons. When a child is born, the child has only self-love. And this is natural: he does not know anybody else, he knows only himself. The child is the most selfish being, the most selfish, self-centered being. He exists for himself, and he imagines that the whole world exists to serve him. And because he is so helpless everybody has to serve him, so he is justified. Whenever he cries the mother runs to give him food, milk, help, warmth, love, and he becomes dictatorial.
Every child becomes dictatorial and he knows that everybody follows. Whatsoever his desire it has to be fulfilled immediately, otherwise he goes mad. He is so helpless, and nothing can be done – we have to serve him. His ego becomes strengthened. The mother, the father, the family, everybody around him helps him, serves him, and he feels that he is the center of the world. And almost always it happens that you never grow out of this childhood nonsense. You remain the center, and you think everybody has to serve you.
How can you love? – because love means the other has become the center. Love is a very great jump: you are not the center, the other has become the center. You have become the shadow. Now the other has the meaning, and just to serve him or her is happiness. But this never happens. The husband is juvenile, the wife is juvenile, and they remain with their childhood concept that I am the center and the other has to serve me. This creates chaos, this creates misery and hell. Love has to be learned; it is a growth. When you can throw your ego, only then can you love.
The Upanishads are not against thought, but they have a preference list – love must be first. And we have done quite the opposite. There is not a single school, college or university where love is taught. Only thought is taught everywhere: schools, colleges, universities – they all exist to train you how to think. Nobody trains you how to feel, how to be more loving. And it is simple: if nobody teaches you mathematics, you are not going to learn it; if nobody teaches you language, you are not going to learn it; and nobody teaches you love, so you have not learned it. But you believe that you are a lover, and in search of the right person who can love you.

I have heard about one man: he was in search of a perfect wife, the ideal woman. Obviously he could never find her. He searched and searched and then became old. Then somebody asked, “For what are you waiting? Now get married! You are just on the verge of death.”
The man said, “But I cannot – unless to an ideal woman, a perfect woman.”
So the friend asked, “But you have been searching. Could you not find a single woman upon this whole earth?”
He said, “Yes, once I did – but that woman was in search of a perfect husband.”

You think you are perfect; you are waiting just for the other perfect person and then everything will be good. This is not going to help; this is impossible. You have learned to think, and that has become the base. That’s why your whole personality is upside down.
The second stage is of thought, the first of feeling. What is this stage of thought?
He lives in the care of learned men who explain best what listening, remembering, right conduct, contemplation and meditation are.
Not only logic…. Our schools teach only logic. In many ways they make you argumentative, that’s all. The Upanishads say, the first thing: He lives in the care of learned men.
In the days of the Upanishads teaching was a very intimate phenomenon, a very personal phenomenon; it was really just like a love affair. So students would move all over the country in search of a master with whom they could feel closeness, intimacy, from whom they could feel care – somebody who cared, who loved, in whose presence they could flower. Sometimes thousands of miles would be traveled to find a master with whom to live. That was the first requirement. Teaching was not so important; the teacher was more important.
Nowadays, particularly in America, they say the student is more important than the teacher. They say “student-oriented education,” and they have made their point and the students have heard about it – that they are the center and the teacher is just a servant, there to serve. This is absolute nonsense, because a disciple cannot be the center. He has come to learn, and learning means he has to be receptive, trusting, in deep faith. So if there is so much student unrest all over the world, it is the natural consequence, the logical consequence, of the whole nonsense that has been spread in this century that education should be “student-oriented.” Then the teacher becomes just a servant.
In India in the days of the Upanishads the teacher was the center, and the real thing was not what he was teaching; the real thing was what he was. Just his presence was a deep phenomenon; it helped the person to grow. He cared, he loved, and teaching was secondary, teaching followed. That was also not very important. The important thing was to be near a person who was grown-up, who was really an adult. So the way, the method that was followed was really one of the most intricate systems ever developed in the world.
The system was this: that for twenty-five years everybody was to remain celibate, a brahmachari – for twenty-five years, for the first stage of life. Every boy, every girl, was expected to remain celibate for twenty-five years. Not that they were against sex – no, really they were the persons who knew the beauty of sex, and they created a phenomenon where sex could be lived to its utmost, where sex was transformed into samadhi – but they knew the way. Twenty-five years of celibacy would create the energy; you would accumulate energy, enough energy so that sex would become a very deep and penetrating phenomenon.
Now in the West sex has become superficial. It is not more than sneezing – just something to be thrown out of the body, just a type of relief. And it is so: if you don’t have enough energy gathered then sex will become superficial, just like sneezing – a relief, not a transforming phenomenon, not an alchemy.
When you had so much energy, when you had waited twenty-five years and your every cell was filled with energy, then they allowed you to move into marriage and love. Then this experience of love was going to be very very deep, intense. The intensity depends on energy. This is the law: intensity depends on energy. If there is no energy there will be no intensity; the more energy, the more intense the phenomenon. And if you had waited for twenty-five years, you would have become a tremendous energy, and even in one sexual experience you could attain to the very highest that is possible through bioenergy.
Then they allowed the man to move into family life. For twenty-five years he was to live an ordinary life: to feel every desire, every thirst, every hunger; to fulfill every desire – at least to try for twenty-five years, with intense force. When the person was fifty, then his children would be coming back from the gurukul, from the house of the master. His children would be coming back, and they would then be about twenty-five.
And this was the rule: when a person had reached fifty, about fifty, and his children were back and were going into marriage, he should again become celibate – because it was thought absurd that a father should be making love in the house when the son was making love. This was thought absurd, this seemed childish, because then the father had not grown beyond it. And how could a son respect a father when he felt that the father was just the same as him? If the son was playing with sex and the father also was playing with sex, how could he think that he had grown up? The moment the son was married the father was ready to move beyond sex. So this stage of twenty-five years was called vanaprastha – looking towards the forest. He had not yet gone to the forest, but was now ready to leave, packing.
When the son had reached fifty and was ready to pack to go to the forest, the father would be seventy-five and he would have renounced life. Now he was an old, wise man; he had lived life. And this man would become the teacher. At the age of seventy-five he would move to the forest, he would create a small school around him, he would become the teacher. And this was the thought: that only an old man can be the teacher, because how can one who has not lived life be a teacher? How can one who has not known all – the good and the bad both; one who has not moved through all the ways that life gives you, the right and the wrong both – how can he be a teacher? Only one who has been through desires, who has known the intensity of desires and the foolishness also, who has been into sex and who has gone beyond sex – only such a man can be a teacher, only such a man can teach life.
It was inconceivable that a young man could become a teacher. It was inconceivable. How can he become a teacher? He has not been through life, he is not yet seasoned. One must be with old, wise men, in their care, just near them; such men who can explain what right listening is, right remembering is, right conduct is, right contemplation is, right meditation is. And you cannot explain these things just by reading and studying; only a lived experience can make you capable of teaching.
What is right listening? Shravan, right listening, is the base…because when a disciple comes to a master or a student to a teacher, the first thing is to be taught how to listen. Nowdays nobody is teaching how to listen. You go to any school, even in the kindergarten, and they have started lecturing, but no one has ever taught how to listen. Unless you know how to listen, how can you be taught? Sometimes the training for how to listen takes years. Your mind has to be completely silent, only then can you listen. So a master will try to quiet your inner talk, the inner chattering, the constant chattering which is there.
If you are chattering inside, you cannot listen. I am talking here. If you are talking within yourself, how can you listen? Then your mind is just like a radio, and the arrow by which you tune into a station is wavering, or you have caught two stations simultaneously and so everything is a confusion. I am talking here and you are talking within yourself, so there are two stations simultaneously. Everything is in confusion. You cannot learn and you cannot understand – you can only misunderstand. How to listen was the first thing – in ordinary teaching and in spiritual teaching also. How to listen? The first rule is: the inner talk must cease.

It happened, there was one famous Zen monk, Nansen. He lived in a deep forest away from the capital of Japan, Tokyo. One day a professor of the university of Tokyo, a professor of philosophy, came to visit Nansen. He came into the hut and said, “Tell me something about spirituality. Tell me something about the inner self.”
Nansen said, “You look tired after traveling so long, there is perspiration on your head, so rest a little, relax a little, and I will prepare tea for you.”
So the old Nansen prepared tea, and the professor rested. But the rest was just superficial; inside he couldn’t rest. How can a professor rest? Impossible! He goes on talking inside.
I had one professor…I was the only student in his subject. Sometimes if I was late I would see that he had already started, he was already lecturing. And he had told me, “If you want to go out, you can go, but don’t disturb me” – and I was the only student! So I used to go out, roam about, and then come back, and he was still lecturing. I was irrelevant.
A professor, and a professor of philosophy at that – insult added to injury…. He rested only bodily, the inner talk continued. But you cannot escape a person like Nansen; he looks inside. So he brought tea, put a cup in the hand of the professor, poured tea, continued pouring, and the tea started flowing into the saucer also. Then the professor became afraid because he was continuing; soon it would start going onto the floor. So he said, “Now stop! Are you mad? Now my cup cannot have any more tea, not a single drop.”
Nansen started laughing and he said, “You are so careful about the tea and the cup, and you know well that when the cup is full not a single drop more can be held in it. And you ask me about spirituality, meditation. You are so full inside, not a single drop can enter. So first go out, empty your cup, and then come back. Unless you are empty I am not going to waste my energy pouring into you.”

The first thing for right learning, right listening, is to be empty; that was taught. Now education is doing completely the reverse. The first thing is how to fill your mind, and the more your mind is filled the more you are appreciated. Your mind must be clean, pure; inner talk must cease. Only then you can be attentive.
Then right remembering. Remember that only remembering is not enough; you need the opposite capacity of forgetting also. If you go on remembering everything you will go mad. And that is what has happened – you cannot forget. Forgetting is as much needed as remembering. The useless must be thrown out of the mind and forgotten, and only the essential should be remembered.
Right remembering means continuously throwing rubbish out; choosing only the essential, the true, the real, and throwing all that is rubbish. Much rubbish is there. The newspapers are filled with it, the books are filled with it, and everybody goes on pouring his rubbish into you. The first thing for right remembering is: throw the rubbish out, don’t fill the mind with rubbish – unnecessary, nonessential.
Shankara has said that if you cannot make the distinction between what is essential and what is nonessential, your mind will become just a wastepaper basket; useless things will be there – and they are. Right remembering means also right forgetting. Be alert, because every single moment millions of facts are being thrown into your mind. Your mind is taking much information from everywhere. That’s why you cannot sleep: there is so much excitement in the mind, so many things going on. You cannot remember, because you remember so much that the whole capacity, the whole energy, is lost.

When Alexander came to India he was surprised; he could not believe the capacity of Hindu brahmins for memorizing things. He couldn’t believe it, it was almost impossible. It happened that wise men in Greece had told him, “When you come back from India, bring the Vedas, the four scriptures, the supreme-most Indian scriptures. Bring them with you.” Only at the last moment when he was returning he remembered, so in a village of Punjab he inquired, “Who has got the Vedas?”
They said, “A brahmin family – but it is impossible, they will not give them to you.”
Alexander said, “Don’t you worry about that. I will force them, I will kill them – they will have to give.”
The brahmins’ house was surrounded by the military, and Alexander went to the head of the family, the old man, and said, “I want the four scriptures, the four Vedas, and I will burn the whole house if you say no. You and your four Vedas all will be burned.”
The old man said, “There is no need. I will give them to you, but in the morning. And let your military be there, don’t be suspicious. I will give them in the morning.”
Alexander said, “Why not now?”
He said, “Before giving them I will have to go through a ritual of departure. My family had them for thousands of years, they have become part of our heart, so the whole night we will pray, go through a particular ritual, and in the morning we will present them.”
Alexander believed the old man. The military was there and there was no possibility that he could escape. But in the morning when he came a fire was burning and the old man was sitting there reading from the last page of the four books. Alexander waited. The old man read the last page and threw it in the fire. Alexander said, “What are you doing?”
He said, “The four Vedas have gone into the fire, but these are my four sons. They have listened the whole night and they remember. You take them.”
Just one listening! Alexander could not believe it. He called other brahmins to check. How could they remember such big books? And they had heard them only once! They repeated verbatim from the first word to the last. Alexander told his wise men, “We don’t know anything about what right remembering is. These Hindus have done miracles. How can they remember?”

The secret is that if you are capable of forgetting nonsense, you have so much energy to remember that anything can be remembered – the energy is the same. For example, if you have one hundred percent energy, ninety-nine percent is involved in nonsense. In the old days, a brahmin had one hundred percent of energy available; then he could remember the Vedas. Whatsoever you remember is always more than the four Vedas, so the capacity is there but you have devoted it to nonsense. Right remembering was taught: how to forget the useless, how to choose the essential, and only remember the essential.
Right conduct: how to behave rightly, a right discipline of behavior – because everything helps you grow. When you behave wrongly you are not doing something wrong to others, you are doing wrong to yourself. When you behave wrongly your energy moves into wrong directions. Outwardly, right conduct may seem like something imposed; it is not.
For example, Gurdjieff used to say – in his institute in Paris he had written it on the walls in big letters – one motto: “A person is good who respects his father and mother.” In the West particularly this seems absurd. And just this is the definition of a good man, “A person is good who respects his father and mother”?
What was he saying? Remember that life is such that you are bound to hate your father and mother; every boy, every girl, has to hate. This is how it happens naturally, because the father has to say no to many things, the father has to discipline you, the father has even sometimes to be angry with you. He cannot allow you absolute freedom because that would be destructive to you. He has to force discipline, and the ego of the child is hurt; he starts hating.
Every man hates his father unless right conduct is taught from the very beginning; every girl hates her mother unless a right conduct is taught from the very beginning. And if you cannot respect your father, you cannot respect anybody – then the whole possibility of respect is lost. The father is the first point from where respect grows.
If you can respect your father, you will respect many people. If you hate your father, then all father figures will be hated. If you hate your father, you will hate your teacher, because he is also a father figure. If you hate your father, you will hate anybody who is powerful. You cannot love God, because he is the father figure for the whole cosmos.
In the West, first the respect for the father disappeared, and then God was dead. It is not accidental that every religion says, “God, my father, the father of all.” It is not accidental, it is meaningful – but it has to grow from your own father. If you respect your father then all father-figures will be respected, and ultimately you can respect the divine.
If you hate your mother then hatred will become the very base of your life, because the first love has to be learned through the mother. You cannot love a wife if you have hated your mother, because the wife is a woman, and one who hates his mother hates women. And the mother will follow you like a dangerous shadow – every time you look at a woman, the mother will be present there. Really, every woman is a mother, essentially a mother. You cannot love a woman if you hate your mother. Really, you cannot love at all.
Gurdjieff was right; this is the definition of a good man – that he respects his father and mother. This is impossible. Remember, this is not easy. It is one of the most impossible things to respect the father and mother; to respect one’s parents is one of the impossible things in this world. False respect is not meant, just hypocrisy is not meant, but a real respect. That was taught; that was called right conduct.
Respect and love were taught, many other things were taught. Right conduct means to be always happy, blissful in your behavior, to be refined, gentle, to not hurt anybody in any way – because this then becomes the pattern. Right conduct helps you grow, and it helps you avoid unnecessary problems, unnecessary crises. You create many problems unnecessarily, and in those problems and in solving them you waste energy, time – you waste everything. A small problem can become destructive to your whole life. Right conduct means moving in this world in such a way that there is no conflict with others, no conflict arises; moving in this world in such a way that you don’t create unnecessary enemies – the very way you behave creates friendship. This is good for you.
Right contemplation and right meditation….
This will look a little paradoxical, because we think meditation is always right, contemplation is always right. That is not the case; you can contemplate on wrong things. For example, when you are angry you contemplate; really, when you are angry you contemplate more. You become obsessed with one thing and you go on thinking around and around it, near it. Try to think about God; contemplate for one single moment and you have moved away to something else. But think about sex and the contemplation is easy; you can contemplate.
There are people who go on doing that. If you give them a picture or a statue of God they will say, “What will this do? This is just a picture.” But give them a pornographic magazine, give them a picture of a nude woman, and they will hide it under the pillow, and when there is no one around they will contemplate. Pornography is contemplation; the mind starts moving around and around a center.
Contemplation means mind moving around a center: not moving in a line, not going from one subject to another, but just sticking to one subject, and the whole energy moving in a circle. When mind moves in a circle around a subject, that subject becomes deep-rooted; whatsoever you contemplate, ultimately you become. Right contemplation means contemplation which will help you to grow beyond desire, which will help you to transcend desire. You contemplate, but wrongly.
This happens with meditation also. You have moments of meditation sometimes. If you are angry and you hit a person, in that moment of hitting all thought stops. You have just become anger; the whole energy is transformed into anger. You are one-pointed, deep in meditation, not a single thought in the mind, no cloud in the mind, the whole mind and energy and body moving in one direction – but that is wrong meditation. Mind has stopped thinking but has become anger – it should become love, it should become compassion.
In sex, meditation happens. A moment comes when you are reaching the climax, a moment comes just before ejaculation or orgasm when mind stops. You become pure energy, bioenergy, just a stream of energy, no-mind. No-mind is meditation. But if you become stuck just in sexual meditation you will not grow. Nothing is wrong in it, but you have to grow beyond it because this sexual meditation depends on the other and anything that depends on the other cannot make you ultimately free; you will remain dependent.
Right meditation means a moment where mind ceases, you have become one energy – but not moving towards the other, not moving in any direction, but simply remaining in yourself. That will become samadhi. Meditation moving towards the other becomes a sexual act; meditation moving nowhere, remaining inside, becomes samadhi. These things are for the second stage.
Having acquired knowledge of such scriptures as are worth listening to, he efficiently discriminates between what is duty and what is not.
This is called vivek: discrimination between duty, what is duty, and what is not. In the second stage you have to be continuously alert of what to do and what not to do. If you are not alert you will be in a mess. What to do and what not to do? You have a certain amount of energy. You can waste it in things which are not worth doing, and you can create complexities through doing them.
You talk to someone and then a discussion arises, then the discussion be-comes an angry fight – you are wasting energy. And this will create a pattern; the man will try to take revenge in some other circumstances. You have created a karma, a pattern; now it will follow you. But why move into a discussion unnecessarily? Why create an argument?

I have heard one Chinese Taoist parable. Three Taoists, followers of Lao Tzu, went into a forest to meditate. They decided that they were not going to chatter, discuss anything. One year passed in silence. Then suddenly one day a horseman passed before their cave, so one of the monks said, “What a beautiful white horse!” This was the only utterance in one year.
One year passed again, then the second monk said, “This is not good. You have started an argument. The horse was not white but black!”
Then one year passed again, and the third monk said, “If there is going to be bickering, I am leaving!”
One year had passed, but it had not passed from the mind of the second monk. He was continuously thinking that the horse was black, not white. Then he could not withhold it any more, so he said, “Enough. The horse was black. But I don’t want any dispute about it.”
Then the third monk must have continued thinking inside that they had disturbed the silence and they were creating a dispute. Then it became so much that he could not control it any more, so after one year he said, “Enough. I am leaving. This is too much. You are creating an argument! We have not come here to decide whether the horse was white or black!”

This is how mind functions. A small trigger and it goes on and on – it may go on for eternity if you don’t become aware. Discriminate as to what is to be done, and then you will feel there is a very very small number of duties. You can do them very well. Discriminate as to what is not to be done, and ninety percent of your acts will drop. They are unnecessary, you could have avoided them. Why get entangled? Remain more and more aloof, and do only that which is absolutely necessary. And remember, do it only when it is going to help somebody, otherwise don’t do it.
…And he discriminates also between what is the symbol – pada – and what is the thing symbolized – padarth.
This is something to be understood very deeply. Krishnamurti goes on saying that the word god is not God – this is the meaning of this statement. What is a symbol, and what is symbolized? The word god is not God – you can mistake the very word for God – just like the word water is not water. When you are thirsty, I can write in big letters on a paper WATER and give it to you. You cannot drink it. Even if I do it very scientifically and write h2o, it is useless. You will throw it away, you will say, “Keep your science to yourself. I need water, not h2o.”
The word water and water are two different things, and one who is in search of truth must remember it constantly, because there is every possibility you may become obsessed with words and symbols and may lose contact with reality.
His mind does not suffer from an excess of conceit, pride, greed and attachment, although externally they are apparent to some extent.
The second stage is not the end. There is bound to be some greed, some pride, some attachment, some anger, but one has to be aware and start dropping them from inside. Outside it may not be possible to drop them immediately, because sometimes they are needed also.
In ordinary life, if you cannot become angry you will lose many things. Sometimes just a show of anger will be helpful, but drop it from inside! It has to be dropped from outside also – but later on, when you don’t bother, when nothing makes any difference, when even if you lose something it makes no difference. But remaining in the world, trying for growth, be aware and alert. Don’t suffer from these things. These are sufferings.
If you have very deep-rooted pride, conceit, jealousy, you will suffer. No one else is going to suffer for it. You continue it in the mind, you suffer for it. Somebody is laughing and you think he is laughing at you – then you suffer. You are conceited, and you are always in search of something to hurt you. You are like a wound, waiting for somebody to touch you and then you will be hurt.
Whenever you feel hurt, remember that you have a wound. Don’t throw the responsibility on the other. Just remember that you have a wound and that man has unknowingly touched your wound. Try to heal this wound and then nobody can hurt you, there is no possibility; nobody can laugh at you. That doesn’t mean that nobody will laugh at you – they may laugh, the whole world may laugh, but you can also join in, you can also laugh with them.
He gives up his external impurities as a snake casts off its slough. Such a seeker acquires the actual knowledge of all these things with the grace of the scriptures, the guru, and the sages.
Continuously you have to throw your old skin just like a snake. Every moment it becomes old, and every moment you have to come out of it; then only can you remain alive. Otherwise it always happens that you are almost dead before you die – many years before you die.

It happened once, Mulla Nasruddin came to a police station. He reported that his wife was missing, so they asked him to give some details about his wife – how she looked, how old she was. He said, “One of her eyes is missing. She cannot hear, both the ears are missing. She is crippled, she cannot walk rightly, one leg is missing.” And then he said, “Before I missed her almost ninety percent was missing already!”

Before you die you will have died many years before. Everybody dies a posthumous death. You can prevent this happening only if you die every moment, if you leave the past completely, jump out of it. Dust gathers, memories gather, every moment you become old. Cast off this old skin just like a snake. Come out of it. Be fresh, young again, and live in the moment. Only then will you be able to know what eternal life is. A dead man cannot know it; only a man who is alive to his full capacity can know it.
Such a seeker acquires the actual knowledge of all these things with the grace of the scriptures, the guru, and the sages.
Whatsoever you do will need much visible and invisible help. Sometimes you may not be even aware, but many currents of help are around you, helping you; many sources are just pouring down upon you. You will become aware only in the end when you have achieved. Then you will see that you have to thank the whole universe.
Just think: if Buddha was not there, if he had not happened, if Jesus was not there, if he had not happened, if the Upanishads were never written, if Lao Tzu had not accepted to write down the Tao Te Ching, if there was no Bible, no Koran, no Vedas, where would you have been? You would have been just in the trees, you would have been monkeys. The whole universe has been helping you to grow – known, unknown sources.
You may not be aware, but invisible vibrations are in the atmosphere. Once Buddha is there, the human consciousness can never be the same again. We may forget him completely, we may not even know his name – because many buddhas have been there and we don’t know their names, they were never recorded – but they are there, invisible sources helping you. And when you grow to your totality, then you will become aware that thousands and thousands of hands have been helping you.
That’s why Hindus depict their God with a thousand hands. And you are such a problem that two hands cannot do – thousands even are not of much help. With the grace of the scriptures, with the grace of the master, the guru, with the grace of all the sages, you will achieve. At the second stage this has to become a deep seed within you – the gratitude to all and everything. Even those who have wronged you have also helped you.
Gratitude at the second stage will help you much. And if you become aware, fully alert about this gratitude, then more help will become available. The more you feel the grace and feel thankful, the more grace becomes available to you.

============================================================

Osho,
Contemplating you floods me with a deep ecstasy, and I feel the grace. You say you are not doing anything to create this ecstasy in us, but it is for sure that I also am not doing anything. Then from where is this bliss coming and how is it happening if neither you nor I are doing anything? Is it possible for you to explain more about the mystery of it? What is this phenomenon which we call grace?
It can happen only when neither the disciple nor the master is doing anything; it can happen only in a nondoing, absolute nondoing, because grace is not something you can do anything about. You can simply be receptive, open, that’s all. Nothing positively can be done about it. It is already flowing – the whole existence is filled with grace.
You are closed, and the more you do something, the more you will become closed – because every effort gives you a more egocentric feeling; whatsoever you do creates your ego. You feel I am doing something – and whenever you do something you start thinking of the future, of the result. You start expecting.
So two things happen: firstly, whatsoever you do becomes a food for the ego; secondly, whatsoever you do leads you into the future, then you are not here and now. And these both are the barriers. One thing: you must be here and now, and you must not be – you must not be – an ego. Then you are open, and whenever you are open the grace is already flowing; it has been flowing forever. If you are not getting it, it is not something that you can get by doing. The more you do, the more it will be impossible for you to get it.
The whole effort of the master is to teach you nondoing, nonaction. Or in other words, the whole effort of the master is to take you back – to teach you how to die, how to throw the ego completely, and how to be in a state of nothingness, a state of nonbeing. Buddha called that state anatta, the state of no-self: you are but you are not a self. Then there is no boundary to it, then there is no barrier around you, then all the doors are open – then life can flow, come and go, through you. Grace is not something special that is going to happen to you: grace is the very existence itself, it is grace-filled. The blessing is showering on you.

I will tell you one Buddhist anecdote – it happened in Buddha’s time. One of Buddha’s great disciples, Manjushree, was sitting under a tree meditating. Then suddenly he became aware that flowers were dropping from the tree, many flowers showering. But he was surprised because it was not the season for the flowers, and just in the morning when he had come there was not a single flower on the tree – so where were these millions of flowers showering all around coming from?
So he looked at the tree. Then he was even more mystified, because they were not coming from the tree, they were showering from the sky. So he asked, “Who is doing this? What is happening?”
A voice was heard, “We are the deities, and we are happy that you have attained, and just to express our happiness we are showering these flowers.”
Manjushree said, “What have I attained? I have attained nothing. Rather, on the contrary, I have lost myself. There is no attainment because there is no one who can attain now. This very afternoon I have died.”
The voice said, “We are celebrating your death, because your death is the birth of a new life. You have died, Manjushree, but for the first time you are born.”
More and more flowers showered. Somebody reported to Buddha, “Some-thing has happened. Manjushree is sitting there and flowers go on showering.”
Buddha said, “For the first time Manjushree is not there, that’s why flowers are showering. Up till now Manjushree was there; just today he has disappeared. He has attained the state of no-self, anatta – that’s why flowers are showering.”

These flowers are just symbolic, they indicate grace. This voice is symbolic, no one had said anything. The flowers that were showering there were not those you can see, but invisible flowers. The whole existence celebrates it when you disappear – the whole existence feels blissful. When you are there, you are like a wound – the whole existence suffers with you.
I am trying only one thing – I am not doing anything – to make you filled with bliss. But that cannot be done. Only one thing can be done, and that is to help you to disappear, to help you not to be. And whenever, even for a single moment, you are not there, flowers will start showering. When Manjushree is not there, flowers have always showered.
I am not doing anything, I have never done anything with you. You are doing something. When you also stop, growth happens. When you also drop doing, suddenly the ego disappears. You are not ill; you have become whole and healthy. And whenever you are whole you have become holy.
Both the words come from the same root. The word holy doesn’t mean anything more than becoming whole. Whenever you are whole you are holy. And you cannot be whole with the ego, because ego consists of division. Ego creates a split, you divide yourself. When the ego disappears divisions disappear. So the whole effort is how to make you effortless, and the whole doing is how to bring you to a point where doing ceases, is no more.
Grace has been flowing always, that is already the case. It is there right now, flowing around you, but you don’t give a door to it. All your windows are closed, all your doors are closed; you are closed, imprisoned in yourself, you don’t allow any winds to blow. These meditations we are doing are just to help you to drop all doing.
It is said that once Milarepa, a Tibetan mystic, asked his master, Naropa, “Following you, listening to you, I have dropped everything. But still nothing has happened.”
Naropa laughed and said, “Drop this also – that you have dropped everything. Drop this also, don’t say it any more, because this again is a clinging: I have dropped everything. But the ‘I’ has remained, and the dropping itself has been converted into doing. The doer has remained.”

One man, a great king, came once to Buddha. In one hand he had brought many flowers; in the other hand he had brought a very rare, valuable diamond. And he had brought both because he thought, “Maybe Buddha will not like the diamond; then I will give these flowers, put these flowers at his feet.”
He came, both hands were full; in one hand the great diamond, in the other, flowers. First he tried to put the diamond at Buddha’s feet. Buddha said, “Drop it!” He thought, “He has rejected the diamond,” so he dropped it on the ground. Then he tried to put the flowers and Buddha said, “Drop it!” so he dropped those flowers also. Then there was nothing to give him as a present, so with both hands joined in namaskar, he tried to put his head at Buddha’s feet. And Buddha said, “Drop it!” Then he was in a puzzle – what to do? How to drop this head?
Buddha started laughing and he said, “Those things were useless – you can drop the diamond, that is not of any significance; you can drop the flowers, that is not of much significance – unless you drop yourself. And those two droppings, those two orders, were just to prepare you so that you can learn dropping. Now the ultimate has come. Drop yourself!”

And there cannot be anything else before a buddha. What can you give as a present? Flowers, diamonds are meaningless – unless you give yourself, unless you become the offering.
I am not doing anything; you are still doing – that’s why there is a problem. Whenever one of you drops doing and becomes just like me, not doing anything, suddenly the happening, suddenly flowers will start showering. When Manjushree disappeared…. Flowers had always been showering there at that tree, only Manjushree could not see them. When he disappeared he could see.

The second question:
Osho,
We can practice right behavior, and behavior according to duty, but then we will be wearing false faces, as we are inwardly, as you say, a madhouse. So should we act as we feel, or act as we ought?
The first thing to be understood: you have to be authentic to yourself – sincere, honest. But that doesn’t mean that you have to hurt others through your honesty and sincerity, that doesn’t mean that you have to disturb others, that doesn’t mean that you have to disturb the rules of the game. All relationships are just rules of the game, and many times you will have to act and wear masks, false faces. The only thing to remember is: don’t become the mask. Use it if it is good, and keep the rules, but don’t become the mask, don’t get identified. Act it, don’t get identified with it.
This is a great problem, particularly in the West for the new generation. They have heard too much; they have already been seduced by this idea: be sincere and be honest. This is good, but you don’t know how cunning and destructive the mind is. Your mind can find excuses. You can say a truth, not because you love truth so much but just to hurt somebody; you can use it as a weapon. And if you are using it as a weapon it is not truth, it is worse than a lie.
Sometimes you can help somebody through a lie, and sometimes relationship becomes more easy through a lie. Then use it – but don’t get identified with it. What I am saying is: Be a good player, learn the rules of the game; don’t be too adamant about anything.
It happened:

I came back from the university and my father and my mother were worried; they were worried about me, about what I was going to do. They were worried about my marriage. So my father started sending messages through his friends asking my opinion whether I was ready to get married or not. So I told his friends, “This is between me and my father, don’t you come in. Tell my father that he can ask me.”
And he was afraid, because I have never said no to him for anything. So he was afraid, he was afraid because I would not say no. Even if I didn’t want to be married I would say yes – that was the worry in his mind. Even if I didn’t want to get into a householder’s life, I would not say no, I would say yes. And that yes would be false. So what to do? He couldn’t ask me – he has not asked yet – because he knew well that I would not break any rule. I would have said yes.
Then he tried through my mother. She asked me one night; she came to my bed, sat there, and asked me what I thought about marriage. So I said, “I have not married yet, so I have no experience. You know well, you have the experience, so you tell me. Take fifteen days: think over it, contemplate, and if you feel you have achieved something through it, then just order me. I will follow the order. Don’t ask about my opinion – I have none, because I have no experience. You are experienced. If you were again given a chance, would you get married?”
She said, “You are trying to confuse me.”
I said, “You take your time, at your own ease. I will wait for two weeks, then you order me. I will just follow…because I don’t know.”
So for two weeks she was worried. She could not sleep, because she knew if she said to marry I would obey. Then she would be responsible, not I. So after two weeks she said, “I am not going to say anything, because if I look to my own experience, then I would not like you to move into that life. But I cannot say anything now.”

So this is how I remained unmarried. Sincerely, authentically, I was not ready to marry, I was not intending it at all. But I could have acted. And nothing is wrong, because every experience helps you to grow. No-marriage helps, marriage also helps; there is not much difference. Everything helps you to grow in its own way.
The one thing to remember is: life is a great complexity. You are not alone here, there are many others related to you. Be sincere unto yourself, never be false there. Know well what you want, and for yourself remain that. But there are others also; don’t unnecessarily hurt them. And if you need to wear masks, wear them and enjoy them, but remember, they are not your original face, and be capable of taking them off any moment. Remain the master, don’t become the slave; otherwise you can be violent through your sincerity, unnecessarily you can be violent.
I have seen persons who are cruel, violent, aggressive, sadistic – but sincere, very true, authentic. But they are using their authenticity just for their sadism. They want to make others suffer, and their trick is such that you cannot escape them. They are true, so you cannot say, “You are bad.” They are good people, they are never bad, so no one can say to them, “You are bad.” They are always good, and they do the bad through their good.
Don’t do that, and don’t take life too seriously. Nothing is wrong in masks also, faces also. Just as in the drama on the stage they use faces and enjoy and the audience also enjoys, why not enjoy them in real life also? It is not more than a drama. But I am not saying for you to be dishonest. Be sincere with yourself, don’t get identified. But life is great; there are many around you related in many invisible nets. Don’t hurt anybody.

I will tell you one anecdote. It happened, Buddha became enlightened, and then he came back to his town after twelve years. He had escaped one night from his house without even telling his wife that he was leaving. He had gone to her room. She was sleeping with Buddha’s child, the only child, who was just a few days old.
Buddha wanted to touch the small child, to feel, to love and embrace, but then he thought, “If the wife is awakened she may start crying and weeping and may create a mess. The whole house will gather, and then it will be difficult to leave.” So he simply escaped from the door; he just looked in and escaped like a coward. Then for twelve years he never came back.
After twelve years, when he had become enlightened, he came back. His chief disciple was Ananda. Ananda was his elder cousin-brother, and before he took initiation with Buddha he had asked for a few promises. He took sannyas, he took initiation from Buddha, but he was older than Buddha, “So,” he said, “before I take initiation give me some promises as your elder brother, because once I have been initiated you will be the master and I will be the disciple. Then I cannot ask anything. Now I can even order you.”
These are the rules of the game. So Buddha said, “Okay.” He was enlightened, and this unenlightened man was saying, “I am your elder brother.” So Buddha said, “Okay. What do you want?”
He said, “Three promises. One: I will always be with you, you cannot send me anywhere else; wherever you go I will be your shadow. Second: even in the night when you sleep in a room I can come in and out – even while you are asleep. No rules will apply to me. And third: even at midnight when you are asleep, if I bring someone, a seeker, you will have to answer his questions.”
Buddha said, “Okay. You are my elder brother, so I promise.” Then Ananda took initiation, then he become a disciple, and Buddha followed these three things his whole life.
When he came back to his home, he said to Ananda, “Just make one exception, Ananda. My wife Yashodhara has been waiting for twelve years. She is bound to be very angry, and she is a very proud woman. Twelve years is a long time, and I have not been a good husband to her. I escaped from her like a coward, I didn’t even tell her. And I know that if I had told her she would have accepted it because she loves me so much, but I couldn’t gather the courage.
“Now after twelve years, if you come with me when I go to meet my wife, she will feel even worse. She will think that this is a trick; that I have brought you with me so that she cannot express her mind, her suppressed anger, and the many things of these twelve years. And she will behave in a ladylike way, because she belongs to a very good family, a royal family. She will not even cry, no tears will come to her eyes; she will keep the rules of the game. So please, Ananda, only one exception I ask you, and I will never ask any other exception. You just wait outside.”
Ananda said, “Bhante, I think you are enlightened. You are no longer a husband and she is no longer a wife, so why play this game?”
Buddha said, “I am enlightened, she is not. I am no longer a husband, but she is still a wife, and I don’t want to hurt her. Let her keep her mind a little while and I will persuade her. I will persuade her to take a jump and become a sannyasin. But give me a chance. I am enlightened, she is not.”
So Buddha went inside the palace. Of course, Yashodhara was mad. She started saying things; she was angry, crying, weeping, tears coming down, and Buddha stood there, silent, listening to everything patiently, with deep compassion. When all her anger was out she looked at Buddha; when her tears were no more there in her eyes then she looked at Buddha. Then she realized that this man was no longer a husband and she had been talking to a ghost of her memory. The man who left her was no more there. This was totally a different man.
She surrendered, and she said to Buddha, “Why have you come? You are no longer a husband.”
Buddha repeated again, “I may not be a husband, but you are still a wife, and I have come to help you so that you can also transcend this misery, this relationship, this world.”

Others are there, consider them, and don’t try to be violent through so-called good things. So when it is said, “right conduct,” it means right relationship with others. You need not be false. When you can be true without hurting anybody, be true. But if you feel that your truth is going to hurt many and is unnecessary, it can be avoided, then avoid it, because it is not only going to hurt others, it will create patterns of cause, and those causes will return as effects on you, they will become your karmas. Then you will get entangled, and the more entangled you are the more you will have to behave in wrong ways.
Just stop. Just see the situation. If you can be true without hurting anybody, be true. To me, love is greater than truth. Be loving. And if you feel that your truth will be hurtful and violent, it is better to lie than to be true. Wait for the right moment when you can be true, and help the other person to come to such a state where your truth will not hurt him. Don’t be in a hurry.
And life is a big drama; don’t take it too seriously – because seriousness is also a disease of the mind, seriousness is part of the ego. Be playful, don’t be too serious. So sometimes you will have to use masks, because there are children around you and they like masks, they like false faces, and they enjoy. Help them to grow so they can face the real face, they can encounter it. But before they can encounter it, don’t create any trouble. Right conduct is just consideration for others.
And look: there is a great difference. You may misunderstand what I am saying. When you lie, you lie for yourself. And I am saying: if you need, and if you feel the need to lie, only lie for the consideration of others. Never lie for yourself, don’t use any mask for yourself. But if you feel it is going to help others, it will be good for them, use the mask. And inside remain alert that this is just a game you are acting, this is not real.
Sometimes you may need to be angry to your child, to your son, to your daughter. There are situations when anger helps. If you say something to your child coldly, it is not loving. If you say to your child, “Don’t do this,” in a cold manner, it is not loving, it is not going to help. When you say, “Don’t do this!” to your child in anger, deep anger, it reaches the child, and he feels that you love him, that’s why you are angry.
A father who has never been angry with his son has never been loving; anger means that you consider him, you can even be angry. You love him, you feel for him. Sometimes even when you are not feeling angry but you see the need, show the anger, have the face of anger – but remain the master. And if you are the master, then the faces are beautiful, you can use them. But don’t become the face; if you become the face you have become the slave. The whole thing is not to get identified. Remain aloof, distant, and capable at any time to put it on and off – the face is just a device. It will be difficult and complex. It is easy to be untrue, it is easy to be true. The most difficult thing is to be the master of yourself to such an extent that if you want to be untrue you can be untrue, and if you want to be true you can be true.
Gurdjieff’s disciples have written many books about him, and every disciple describes him in a different way. This is very mysterious, it has never happened with any other person in that way. Sometimes it happened that a person went to see Gurdjieff, then left, and then his friend went to see him. They would report to each other and would both give a different picture.
Gurdjieff was a master of changing faces. It is said that he had become so capable that a person sitting by his right side would feel one thing, and a person sitting by his left side would feel differently. He may have been very loving with his left eye, and that half-face was showing love, and with the other side he may have been angry. And both persons would report to each other outside: “What type of man is this? He was so loving.” The other would say, “You are in some illusion…because he was so angry.”
That is possible and such a mastery is beautiful. It is said that no one reported Gurdjieff’s real face, because he never showed anybody his real face. He was always acting, but helping in a way; in many ways he was helping. He would show you the face that was needed by you for your consideration; he would never show you the face that was not needed by you.
To me, and to the Upanishads also, right conduct means just the right rules of behavior with others. You are not going to be here forever. You cannot change the whole world, you cannot change everybody; you can at the most change yourself. So it is better to change yourself inwardly, and don’t try to be in a continuous fight with everybody. Avoid fight – and faces can be helpful. Avoid unnecessary struggle, because that dissipates energy. Preserve your energy to be used for the inner work. And that work is so significant and it needs all your energy that you can give to it, so don’t waste it in unnecessary things.
For the outside world remain an actor, and don’t think that you are deceiving anybody. If they like deception, that’s what they need, that’s what should be given to them. If children like toys to play with, you are not deceiving them. Don’t give them a real gun; let them play with the toy gun, because they like the toy. And don’t think that the toy gun is false; don’t think, “I must be true, I must give a real gun to the child. If he needs a gun, then I must give the true thing. How can I give the toy? This is a deception.”
But the child needs the toy, there is no deception; he doesn’t need the real gun. So just look at the other, at what he needs, and give him that which he needs. Don’t give out of your own consideration, give out of consideration for him. Look at him, study and observe him, and behave in such a way that will be helpful to him and will not be unnecessary trouble for you. This is all that is meant by right conduct.

The third question:
Osho,
Though we can be aware of anger and refrain from hurting others with it, inner anger seems to remain in a dormant state, and at times it becomes aroused by outer happenings. It doesn't seem possible to entirely throw it as it is deep-rooted in early, wrong training, and a lifetime of struggle in the world. Isn't the total disappearance of anger simultaneous with enlightenment? Does an enlightened one ever have any anger?
The first thing: if you feel angry and if you think that it is needed for it to be suppressed, suppress it for the time being – because it is useless just to be angry with someone and then create a chain. Then he will be angry and then more anger will be created, and this can continue even for lives. Everything has a continuity of cause and effect; it becomes a chain.
So if you feel anger and you see it is going to be destructive to you and to the other person, smile, have a false face. And move to your room, close the doors, take your pillow and beat it. Write the name of the person on the pillow and do whatsoever you wanted to do with the person. Don’t suppress it in the system because that is too dangerous. Anger is poison, and when the body is ready to fight the blood is filled with poison – you have to act it out. If you don’t act it out, if you don’t go through a catharsis then you will have to suffer for it. It may become a physical disease, it may cripple your body, and it may poison your relationships – because you were not angry, but the anger was there.
Your boss insulted you and you couldn’t reply to him, so you will come home and you will find some excuse to get angry with the wife. And you will think that she has done something wrong, but that is just rationalization; you wanted someone who is weaker than you, to whom you can be the boss. You will throw the anger on the wife, and she will wait for the child to come back from the school. Suppressed anger finds outlet towards the weaker person. She will wait for the child to come and she will find something – and you can always find something, there is no problem. She can say, “Why are your clothes dirty?” They have always been dirty; every day he comes with dirty clothes from the school. He is a child, not an old man – he doesn’t care about clothes. He can play with the dirt; that is more valuable than those clothes. Then the mother is going to beat the child. And what is the child supposed to do? He will go, take his dog and beat it, or throw his book into the street, or do something that he can do. This way anger goes on moving and moving, it creates ripples, and a single phenomenon becomes multidimensional, unnecessarily.
So I say to you, there is no need to be angry with the person by whom anger has come into you – there is no need. But there is no need to suppress it also. Express it in the vacuum. Have a room in your home, your meditation room, so whatsoever happens, go in that room and do it. And you will enjoy it so much, you cannot imagine; the whole exercise is so beautiful. In the beginning it will look absurd, but soon you will get into it and you will enjoy it. And the pillow is not going to answer, the pillow is not going to create any chain. Rather, on the contrary, the pillow will be very happy that you related with it.
Never suppress, but never create chains – this is the rule. Remember not to suppress, and remember not to create any chain. Once you learn the art you can be free of all these madnesses which come into you, without creating any disturbance in life. Every day catharsis is needed. Life is complex, and many things come into the mind which have to be thrown. That’s why I emphasize Dynamic Meditation so much. You don’t know what you are doing here. When you get into it you are doing all sorts of things. Somebody is throwing anger, somebody is throwing jealousy, somebody throwing hatred, somebody throwing his sadness, screaming – the whole life of misery is being thrown in it.
Make it a point every day: just as you clean your body every day, clean your mind. This is a bath for the mind. Throw everything, but don’t throw upon anybody; that is violence. Throw it into the vacuum. And the vacuum is big enough, the space is big enough. Don’t you get worried about what will happen to the pillow, what will happen to the space – nothing is going to happen, all that you throw into it is absorbed. And then it never replies to you, there is no chain created. The act simply ends, no karma is created through it. Do things in such a way that no future is created through them.
Whatsoever has happened to you, relief is needed, you need that it should be thrown out, but don’t throw it on persons. If you can remember that, soon you will realize that it was absolute foolishness to throw it on persons when it could be thrown just on a pillow. And the same relaxation is felt – even more, because whenever you throw on a person you will feel repentance in the end. You will feel bad, you will feel that you have not done good; then you will feel that it would have been better if you had not done it. But now nothing can be done, and you cannot undo something which has happened. Whatsoever you do, it is there now, you cannot wash it away. There is no way, because you cannot move to the past; it will remain always there.
That’s what Hindus have called the theory of karma: whatsoever you do will remain and will have its influence on your future. A catharsis is necessary, and every day it is necessary unless you have become enlightened, then you don’t gather the past. Now you gather, you collect dust. Throw it every day. In the night, every day for one hour, just throw the past, the whole day. Whatsoever has been done to you and you have done to others, or you wanted to do with others…emotions, anger, hate – many things are there – drop them before you go to sleep.
In the West sleep has become a problem, and in the East also it is becoming a problem. And the problem is only this: you don’t know how to get rid of the day. It follows you, it continues in the mind, and you cannot stop it. You cannot stop unless you throw it. Whosoever is suffering from insomnia should try this dynamic meditation in the night. Just before going to sleep have an inner bath; throw everything and then go to sleep. You will feel like a child again – innocent, unburdened. Sleep will be totally different, the quality will change. But don’t suppress – express. But don’t express to persons.

The fourth question:
Osho,
Can love be taught? Can one be schooled in love? Can one without heart learn to have heart?
No one is without heart. You have the heart, but a nonfunctioning heart; it is there, but not functioning. It is there as a seed, it has not grown. Love cannot be taught, but situations can be created where the heart can grow; and when the heart grows love grows. Situations are needed. Love cannot be taught like mathematics. Mathematics can be directly taught, it is informative; love cannot be taught that way, it is not simply information. You have to grow, you have to change – but situations can be created.
In old Eastern universities – Nalanda, Taxila – there were many situations created where love became possible. For example, children were not taught under the roofs, in the rooms; they were always taught under the trees, in the shade of the trees. Have you ever felt any difference? Sit by the side of a concrete wall, and then go out, close your eyes, sit under a tree, your back in contact with the tree, and feel the difference. With a concrete wall you can feel only death just behind you, everything dead – and a dead situation makes you dead. Under a living tree in the open, where sunrays are dancing and where flowers are blooming, where the breeze will come and the tree will dance, sitting there under the tree you can feel the vibration of life. The more vibrations of life you feel, the more your heart will start functioning. Play with children and you will feel that you have become younger. One of the secrets of remaining always young is to play with children, because when you play with children you forget that you are old.
There have been many experiments. I was reading about one experiment in an Oxford laboratory. One woman who was eighty years old and almost blind, ninety percent blind, was hypnotized. In hypnosis it was suggested to her that her age was regressing, by and by she was becoming younger, then she was becoming a child again. Then the hypnotist suggested, “Now you are only eight years old” – from eighty to eight. And then the hypnotist said, “Now open your eyes.”
She opened her eyes; a book was given to her. It had been impossible for her to read anything, but she simply started reading and she said, “My eyes are so young and fresh.” Just the idea that she was now eight years old, not eighty but eight years old, changed the whole pattern of the eyes.
In England there are almost eight hundred people who have gone beyond the age of one hundred. So there was a report: an interviewer went to ask many of these old persons, these centenarians, how they could live so long. Many answers were given, but I liked one the best, and it may be the key. One old man who was one hundred and twenty said, “I am still interested in young girls.” That may be the key. If a person of one hundred and twenty is still interested in young girls, he can live long.
It is written in old scriptures that in India, whenever a king became old, it was suggested by the wise men that he should sleep in the night with a young girl on each side. You may be one hundred and twenty, but if a girl of twenty years falls in love with you, you cannot remain one hundred and twenty – immediately something, regression, happens. Play with children and you will be younger; sit with old men, listen to their talk and you will feel you are dead, already dead. Your mind depends on many things; situations help.
Bernard Shaw, in his old age, changed his home from London to a village. He was then ninety, and somebody asked, “Why have you changed to this village? Why have you chosen this village?”
He said, “I was walking one day in the cemetery of this village, and there I saw one stone. It was written on that stone, on somebody’s stone, that this man was born in 1800 and died in 1900, and it was written that this man died untimely, when he was only one hundred years of age. So,” Bernard Shaw said, “this village is good to live in, because people here think that death at one hundred years is untimely death. This is a good milieu for living a long time.” He really lived a long time.
Love cannot be taught; you cannot be given a book to read about love. But a situation, a more natural milieu, birds, trees, animals, where you feel life more, will help you to grow into your heart dimension. Persons who love are needed near you, because love is infectious. When a loving person comes near you…you may have been sad before, but when he comes – blissful, loving – suddenly the sadness disappears as if a cloud has moved and the sun has become visible. You feel it. Sit with someone who is sad; within minutes you will feel a sadness gathering in you. We are not like islands, we are joined together, so everyone influences everybody else.
A loving milieu is needed to teach love. In our schools, colleges, universities, there is no loving milieu. The teacher is not related at all. Just because of the traditions of the old days, in India the vice-chancellor is never called the vice-chancellor, he is called kulapati, the head of the family. There were ten thousand students in Nalanda, and the head of the family, the vice-chancellor, knew every student by his face and name. He knew everybody – ten thousand students. When someone was ill and when someone was okay, he would go and see. He loved his students, he knew them by name. He was really the “head of the family.” Just traditionally in India they still go on calling the vice-chancellor kulapati.
I was in a university, and I asked the kulapati, “What type of kulapati are you? What type of head of the family are you? You don’t know even a single student by name – no personal relationships, you are not related at all. You may be an administrator but you are not a head of the family.” The teacher has to be a loving father; only through love can love be taught. If you love a child you are teaching love to him.
I was reading a letter somebody wrote to me. The woman who wrote the letter belongs to a theosophical family, very religious. She wrote to me, “When-ever there was any problem in the family, any sadness, any anger, any conflict, my mother would give me a book and she would say, ‘Go and look in it.’ The Philosophy of Divine Love, or The Art of Love – but nobody loved me ever; they would always give me books to read. So I would read the books, but I never felt what love is.”
Love cannot be taught in that way; a milieu has to be created. The teacher, the family, the society, must be loving; only then a child learns how to love. Many experiments have been done. A child can be brought up without the mother, or without the mother’s breast. He will grow, he will be healthy, but he will become incapable of love. If the mother has not loved him, if he has not been breastfed, if he has not felt the warmth of his mother’s body, if he has not been touched lovingly, he will not be able to love anybody, his sensitivity will never grow.
So I know love cannot be taught, but still I say it has to be taught. And by teaching love I mean create a milieu, an atmosphere where love can grow, where heart can start functioning. And remember, you are with a heart, but a nonfunctioning heart. It is there waiting to function, and when it starts functioning you will be totally a different person.

============================================================

After this the seeker enters the third stage of yoga
which is known as nonattachment. He fixes his mind unwaveringly on the meaning of scriptural words.
He lives in the monasteries, ashrams, of saints well established
in austerities. He occupies himself with the discussion of the
scriptures and sleeps on a rocky bed. Thus it is that he lives his life. Because he has attained peace of mind, the man of good conduct spends his time in the enjoyment of pleasures that come naturally to him from his excursions into the forest.
He remains detached however, from the objects of desires.
Through the ritual of meritorious deeds and the cultivation of right scriptures, he attains that clarity of vision which sees reality.
On completing this stage,
the seeker experiences a glimpse of enlightenment.
The second stage is that of thought – purity of thought, intensity of thought, contemplation, meditation. Thought is energy; it can move through desires to the objects of the world, it can become a bondage. If thought is associated with desire it becomes bondage; if thought is not associated with desire, freed from desire, thought can be used as a vehicle to reach the ultimate liberation.
The way is the same, only the direction changes. When thought moves to objects, to the world, it creates entanglements, it creates slavery, it creates imprisonment. When thought is not moving to objects but starts moving within, the same energy becomes liberation. The second stage is of thought – to make it pure, to become a witness of it.
The third stage is of vairagya – nonattachment. Nonattachment is very significant, the concept is very basic to all those who are in search of the truth. Mind has the capacity to get attached to anything, and once the mind gets attached to something the mind itself becomes that thing. When your mind is moving towards a sexual object and you get attached, mind becomes sex; when the mind is moving towards power and you get attached to it, mind becomes power, mind becomes politics.
Mind is just like a mirror: whatsoever you get attached to becomes fixed in the mirror, and then mind behaves like a film of a camera. Then mind is not just a mirror, it has become a film. Then whatsoever comes to it, the mind clings to it. These are the two possibilities, or two aspects of the same possibility. Mind has the capacity to get attached, identified, with anything whatsoever.
In hypnosis this is revealed very clearly. If you have seen any hypnotic experiments…or if you have not seen any, then you can try a few experiments yourself; they will be very revealing. Hypnosis is not difficult, a very simple process. Let someone who is willing to cooperate lie down in a relaxed posture, and tell him to fix his eyes on something – the electric light bulb will do – anything shiny so that the eyes get dazed. Let him concentrate without blinking the eyes. After two or three minutes you will feel that his eyes are becoming vacant, empty, sleepy.
Then you start suggesting. You simply say, “Your eyes are getting very heavy, even if you try you cannot keep them open.” And he has to try to keep them open, he has to exert effort to keep them open. Go on suggesting, “Your eyes are getting heavy, heavier, heavier…it is difficult now, you cannot do anything, it is impossible, the eyes are going to close by themselves…no will, no effort of yours can keep them open….” And the person will start feeling as if the eyes have be-come loaded, heavy. He will try, he will make every effort to keep them open, and you go on suggesting the opposite.
After five or six minutes the eyes will close, and the moment the eyes close, the man will start feeling that something is happening which is beyond his control – he cannot keep his own eyes open. Then you go on suggesting, “You are falling into deep sleep, you will become unaware of everything except me.” You have to suggest, “Only my voice will be heard, and everything else will become blank.” Go on suggesting. After ten minutes the person will be fast asleep, but this sleep is totally different from normal sleep because he is not asleep to you. He is asleep to the whole world, he cannot hear anything; if someone else talks he cannot hear, but if you talk he will hear. His conscious mind has dropped, but his unconscious is linked with you – now he is suggestible.
Now try something, some experiment. You can prick his body with a pin and tell him that there will be no pain, and you can go on pushing in the pin and he will not feel any pain. Then you can believe that he has become suggestible. You can give him an onion to eat and tell him that it is an apple and he will think, “This is very sweet, very tasty. I like it.” He is eating onion, but if you have suggested that it is an apple, he will feel that it is an apple. Then he has become more suggestible.
Put a piece of stone, a piece of rock in his hand, and tell him that it is a burning coal. Immediately he will throw it as if his hand has been burned – and it was just a piece of rock, cold, but he will feel it as hot. And not only that, but the spot on his hand, on his skin, will look as if a burning coal has been put there. The skin has burned, it has happened; the body has reacted because the mind accepted the idea.
This is how in India, in Ceylon, in Burma, fakirs, monks, bhikkus, have been walking on fire. They just believe so totally that the body has to follow. Remember, the body always follows the mind. If you think that a cold stone is a burning coal and your mind gets attached to the idea, then the body reacts in that way. The reverse is also true. You can put a burning coal on the hand and say that it is a cold piece of rock, and the hand will not get burned.
Whatsoever the attachment, your life follows that. In this world, the Upanishads say, we are behaving as if we are hypnotized; we are in a deep hypnosis. Nobody else has done that, we have hypnotized ourselves. For millions of lives we have been attached to certain objects of desire; they have become fixed. So whenever you see a woman, immediately your body starts working in a sexual way.
Once it happened, I was sitting on the bank of the Ganges with a friend of mine. Suddenly I felt that he was uncomfortable, so I asked, “What is the matter?”
He said, “That woman!”
A woman was taking a bath in the river, and we could see only the back of the woman – long hair, curly hair, a beautiful back – and he was excited, so he said, “Pardon me, excuse me, we will continue our discussion later on. I must go and see, the body seems to be so beautiful.”
So he went, and then he came back very frustrated because it was not a woman, it was a sadhu, a Hindu monk, a Hindu sannyasin with long hair taking a bath, and the body was beautiful and looked feminine. There was no woman, but the mind got attached, a fixation, and then the whole chemical process in the body started.
Attachment creates the life; a life is created around whatsoever you are attached to. So the Upanishads say it is basic, the third step of sadhana, that the mind should get nonattached; only then this illusory world that you have created around you will disappear. Otherwise you will remain in a dream.
The world is not a dream, remember. This has been very much misunderstood. In the West it has been very much misunderstood; they think that these Indian mystics have called the world illusory. They have not called the world illusory, they call the world you have created around you illusory. And everybody has created a world around himself that is not the real world, that is just your projection. You have got attached to certain things, then you project your dreams onto the reality. By nonattachment, reality is not going to be destroyed; only your dreams will be destroyed, and reality will be revealed to you as it is. So nonattachment becomes a basic step, very foundational.
Now we will enter the sutra:
After this the seeker enters the third stage of yoga which is known as non-attachment. He fixes his mind unwaveringly on the meaning of scriptural words. He lives in the monasteries, ashrams, of saints well established in austerities. He occupies himself with the discussion of the scriptures and sleeps on a rocky bed.
Everything has to be understood. These are old symbols, they have to be penetrated deeply; they are not literal, they are symbolic.
He fixes his mind unwaveringly….
This is the first thing in nonattachment, because a wavering mind cannot get non-attached. Only a nonwavering mind, nishkam, a nonwavering mind, can get nonattached. Why? Look at your mind, observe it: every moment it is wavering. It cannot remain with one object for a single moment, every moment a flux is passing; one thought comes, then another, then another – there is a procession.
You cannot remain with one thought even for a single moment, and if you cannot remain for a single moment with one thought, how can you penetrate it? How can you become aware of its full reality? How can you see the illusion that it creates? You are moving so fast that you cannot observe – observation is impossible. It is just as if you come running into this hall. As soon as you enter from one door you go out from the other. You have just a glimpse, and you cannot know later on whether this hall was real or a dream. You had no time here to know, to penetrate, to analyze, to observe, to be aware.
So fixation of the mind on one content is one of the essential requirements for any seeker – that he should remain with one thought for long periods. Once you can remain with one thought for long periods, you yourself will see that this thought is creating attachment, this thought is creating a world around it, this thought is the basic seed of all illusion. And if you can retain a thought for long periods, you have become the master. Now the mind is not the master and you are not the slave.
And if you can remain with one thought for long periods you can drop it also. You can say to the mind, “Stop!” and the mind stops; you can say to the mind, “Move!” and the mind moves. Now it is not so; you want to stop the process but the mind continues, the mind never listens to you. The mind is the master and you are just following the mind like a shadow. The instrument – mind is just an instrument – has become the soul, and the soul has become the servant. This is the perversion and this is the misery of human beings.
Try to fix your mind on one thing, anything will do. Sit on the ground outside and look at a tree and try to remain with the tree. Whatsoever happens, remain with the tree. The mind will try many waverings, the mind will give you many alternatives to move. The mind will say, “Look! What type of tree is this? What is the name?” Don’t listen to it, because even if you have moved to the name you have moved away from the tree. If you start thinking about the tree you have gone away from the tree. Don’t think about it, remain with the fact that the tree is.
It will be difficult in the beginning because you are not so alert. You are so sleepy that you will forget completely that you were looking at the tree. A dog will start barking and you will look at the dog; a cloud will come in the sky and you have moved; somebody passes and you have forgotten the tree. But go on, again and again. When you remember again that you have forgotten and fallen asleep, move again to the tree. Do it.
If you go on working, after three or four weeks you will be capable of retaining one content in the mind at least for one minute. And that’s a big capacity! That’s a big phenomenon! – because you don’t know, you think one minute is not much. One minute is too much for the mind, because mind moves within seconds. For not even a full second is your mind on one thing. It is wavering – wavering is mind’s nature, it goes on creating waves. And that is the way the attachment is retained.
You love a woman. Even if you love a woman you cannot retain the idea of the woman in your mind. If you look at the woman you will start thinking about her – and you have moved away. You may think about her clothes, you may think about her eyes, you may think about her face and figure, but you have moved away from the woman. Just let the fact remain, don’t think about it, because thinking means wavering. To retain a single content means: don’t think, just look. Thinking means moving, wavering. Just look – looking means nonwavering.
That is the meaning of concentration, and all the religions of the world have used it in this way or that. Their methods may look different but the essential is this: that the mind has to be trained to retain one thing for longer periods. What will happen? Once you get this capacity nothing is to be done. You can penetrate, anything becomes transparent. The very look, and in that look your energy moving, goes deep.
There are two ways for the mind. One is linear, from one thought to another – a, b, c, d – the mind moves in a line. Mind has energy. When it moves from a to b it dissipates energy, when it moves from b to c again energy is dissipated, when it moves from c to d energy has been dissipated. If you retain only a in the mind and don’t allow it to move to b, c, d and so forth and so on, what will happen? The energy that was going to be dissipated in movement will go on hammering on the fact a, and then a new process will start – you will move deeper in the a. Not moving from a to b, but moving from a1 to a2, a3, a4. Now the energy is moving directly, intensely, in one fact. Your eyes will become penetrating.
One sannyasin came to me just yesterday. She is working well, doing well, but just after a meditation I looked deeply into her eyes when she was standing here, and she started trembling and weeping and crying. Then she came to me, crying and weeping, and said, “Why did you look at me so penetratingly? Can’t you look at me a little sweetly?” She said, “I became afraid, and I thought that I must be doing something wrong, that’s why you were looking so penetratingly.”
We have become completely unacquainted with the penetrating eye. We know only superficial, moving eyes from a to b, from b to c – just touching and moving, touching and moving. If somebody looks at you, stares at you deeply, and he is not moving from a to b, b to c, you will become scared – but that is the real look. And you will become scared because his eyes are going deep within you; he is not moving on the surface, he is moving deep, in the depth. You will become scared because you have become unacquainted with it.
Fixation of the mind will give you a penetrating eye. That eye has been known in the occult world as the third eye. When you start moving on a point, not in a line, you gain a force, and that force works. All over the world mesmerists, hypnotists, and other workers in the psychic field have been aware of it for centuries. You can try it. Somebody, a stranger, is walking on the road. You just go behind him and look at the back of his neck. Stare. Immediately he will look back towards you, the energy hits there immediately if you stare.
There is a center at the back of the neck which is very sensitive. Just stare at the center and the person is bound to look back because he will become uneasy, something is entering there. Your eyes are not simply windows to look through, they are energy centers. You are not only absorbing impressions through the eyes, you are throwing energy – but you are not aware. You are not aware because your energy is being dissipated in movement, is waving, wavering from one to two, two to three, three to four – you go on, and every gap takes your energy.
He fixes his mind unwaveringly….
First one has to try to fix this mind unwaveringly on objects, and then on the meaning of the scriptural words.
This is a totally different science. You read a book. Reading is linear: from one word you move to another, from another to another – you go on moving in lines. You may not have observed that different countries have different ways of writing. English is written from the left towards the right, because English is a technical language, not very poetic; a male language, not feminine. Urdu, Arabic, are written from the right to the left. They are more poetic, because the left side is poetry and the right side is mathematics – right is male, left is female.
Chinese is written downwards; neither from left to right, nor from right to left, just from up downwards, because Chinese was developed through Confucian ideology, and Confucius says, “The middle is the goal, the middle is golden – the golden mean.” So they don’t move from left to right, or from right to left; they move from up to down. This is the middle, the mean, neither male nor female.
English is male, Urdu is female – that’s why Urdu is so poetic. No language in the world is as poetic as Urdu. In any language of the world you will need hundreds of lines, and then too you will not be able to express a poetic thing. In Urdu just two lines will do and they will stop the heart. It moves from right to left, from male to female – female is the end.
All over the world God has always been conceived of as the father. Only in the East are there a few religions which conceive of God as the mother – but Sufis, Mohammedans, are the only ones who conceive of God as the beloved; not mother, beloved. The feminine is the end. From the male they move to the female, to the feminine, but movement is there.
Chinese moves from up to down, into the depth, so Chinese symbols can express things no other language can express – because every language is linear, and Chinese is in the depth. So if you have read Lao Tzu’s Tao Te Ching in translation, you know that every translation differs. If you read ten translations then all the translations will be different; you cannot say who is wrong and who is right, because Chinese carries so much meaning and depth that ten, or even one hundred meanings are possible. In depth more and more meanings are revealed.
In India it is said that a scripture like the Vedas, the Upanishads or the Gita, is not to be read in a linear way. You have to concentrate on each word. Read a word, then don’t move; look at the word, close your eyes, and wait for the meaning to be revealed. This is a totally different concept of studying a thing, so Westerners sometimes cannot understand that a person goes on reading the Gita every day for his whole life. This looks absurd. If you have read it once it is finished! Why do you go on reading the Gita every day? Once you have read it, what is the meaning in reading it again?
But Hindus say the Gita is not a linear book. Each word has to be looked at with a fixed mind; in each word you have to penetrate deep – so deep that the word disappears and only silence remains. And the word does not have the meaning, remember – the meaning is hidden in you. The word is just a technical support to help the meaning that is within you to come up. So the word is a mantra, or a yantra, a design which will help you to bring up the meaning which is hidden in your soul.
See the difference. In the West if you read a thing, then the word has a meaning; in the East the word has got no meaning – the meaning is in the reader. The word is just a device to bring the reader to his own inner meaning, to encounter the inner meaning. The word will just provoke you inside so that your inner meaning flowers through it. The word has to be forgotten and the inner meaning has to be carried, but you will have to wait; and mind needs fixation, mind needs concentration, only then the inner meaning can be revealed. So one has to go on reading the same thing every day, but it is not the same because you have been changing.
If a boy of fifteen reads the Gita the meaning is going to be boyish, immature, juvenile. Then a man, a young man of thirty reads the Gita – the meaning is going to be different, more romantic. In that meaning sex will be involved, in that meaning love will be projected, in that meaning the youth will project his youth. And then an old man of sixty reads the Gita. He has passed through the ups and downs of life, he has seen misery and glimpses of happiness, he has lived through much. He will see something else in the Gita; in that something else death will be involved, death will be all over the Gita.
And a man of one hundred, to whom even death has become irrelevant, to whom even death has become an accepted fact, not a problem, who is not afraid of death but rather, on the contrary, is just waiting for it so that the imprisonment in the body is broken and the soul can fly – he looks in the Gita and it will be totally different. Now it will transcend life, the meaning will transcend life.
The meaning depends on the state of your mind. So the meaning of a word is not in the dictionary, the meaning of the word is in the reader, and the words are used as devices to bring that meaning up. But if you go on reading fast that will not help. In the West they go on creating more and more techniques for how to read fast, how to finish the book as fast as possible, because time is short. And there are techniques by which you can read very fast; whatsoever your speed right now it can be doubled very easily, and you can even double it again if you work a little harder. And if you are really persistent you can again double that speed.
So if you are reading sixty words per minute, you can read two hundred and forty words per minute if you work hard – but then you will be moving in a linear way. And if you move fast then your unconscious starts reading, the conscious just gives hints. Subliminal reading becomes possible, but then you cannot penetrate.
The question is not to read much, the question is to read very little but to read deep. The depth is significant, because in the depth quality is hidden. If you read fast quantity will be great, but quality will be no more there, it will be mechanical. You will not be imbibing whatsoever you are reading, you will not be changed through whatsoever you are reading; it will just be a memorization.
He fixes his mind unwaveringly on the meaning of the scriptural words.
In Sanskrit every word has multi-meanings. In the West it will be thought that this is not good; a word should mean only one thing, it should have only one meaning. Only then can there be a science of language, only then can the language become technical, scientific. So one word should have only one meaning. But Sanskrit is not a scientific language, it is a religious language. And if the people who spoke Sanskrit claimed that their language is divine it means something. Every word has multi-meanings; no word is fixed, solid, it is liquid, flowing. You can derive many meanings through it – it depends on you. It has many shades, many colors; it is not a dead stone, it is an alive flower.
If you go in the morning it looks different, if you go in the afternoon the same flower looks different, because the whole milieu has changed. When you go in the evening the same flower has a different poetry to it. In the morning it was happy, alive, dancing, filled with so many desires, hopes, dreams, was maybe thinking to conquer the whole world. By the afternoon desires have dropped, much frustration has come, the flower is not hoping so much now, it is a little depressed, a little sad. By the evening life has proved illusory, the flower is on its deathbed, shrunken, closed, no dreams, no hopes.
Sanskrit words are like flowers, they have moods; that’s why Sanskrit can be interpreted in millions of ways. The Gita has one thousand interpretations. You cannot conceive of The Bible having one thousand interpretations – impossible! You cannot conceive of the Koran having one thousand interpretations – not a single interpretation exists. The Koran has never been interpreted. There are one thousand interpretations of the Gita, and still they are not enough. Every century will add many more, and while human consciousness is on the earth interpretations will be added forever and ever. The Gita cannot be exhausted, it is impossible to exhaust it, because every word has many meanings.
Sanskrit is liquid, flowing, moody, and this is good because this gives you freedom. The reader has freedom, he is not a slave; the words are not imposed on him, he can play with those words. He can change his moods through those words, and he can change those words through his moods. The Gita is alive, and every alive thing has moods; only dead things have no moods. In that way English is a dead language. It will look paradoxical, because English scholars go on saying that Sanskrit is a dead language because no one speaks it. They are right in a way – because nobody speaks it, it is a dead language, but really modern languages are dead.
No one speaks Sanskrit now, but it is an alive language, the very quality of it is alive; every word has a life of its own and changes, moves, flows, riverlike. Much is possible through the play of Sanskrit words, and they have been arranged in such a way that if you concentrate on them, many worlds of meanings will be revealed to you.
He fixes his mind unwaveringly on the meaning of scriptural words. He lives in the monasteries….
First he fixes on the Vedas, on the old scriptures. These scriptures are not just books. They are not written for any other reason than this: they have been written to reveal a certain deep secret. They are not for you to read and enjoy and throw just like novels; they are to be pondered, contemplated, meditated on. You have to go so deep in them that this going into depth becomes natural to you. And they were not written by persons who were writers, persons not knowing anything but just through their egoistic feeling writing things.
Gurdjieff divides all scriptures into two divisions: one he calls subjective, the other he calls objective. These scriptures – the Vedas, the Upanishads, are objective, not subjective. The whole literature that we are creating is subjective, the writer is throwing his own subjectivity into it. A poet, a modern poet, or a painter, a modern Picasso, or a novelist, a story-writer – they are writing their own minds there. They are not concerned with the person who is going to read, remember, they are more concerned with themselves. This is a catharsis for them. They are mad inside, burdened – they want to express.
You can read a good novel, but don’t go to see the novelist; you may be disappointed. You can read a good poem, but don’t go to see the poet; you will be disappointed, because the poetry will give you a glimpse of a high realm, it will put you on high, but if you go to see the poet you will find a very ordinary man – you may even be better than him. The man has not changed through his poem, how can the poem change you? The man has not known that height, he may have dreamed it or he may have taken LSD.
One girl came to me just two or three days ago, and she said, “I was in Goa” – she is my sannyasin – and she said, “I took LSD and then I became certain that enlightenment had happened to me, so I threw your mala into the sea, because now there is no need. I changed the dress, because I am now enlightened, so what is the use of orange or the mala or anything?”
This is a sort of madness. Enlightenment is not so cheap. But in the West they are making everything cheap. I go on hearing that there are three week intense enlightenment growth groups – in three weeks you are enlightened!
A poet may have dreamed, may have taken hashish. And scientists say that poets have some difference, some chemical difference from ordinary persons – they have some hashish in their blood, really, so they can imagine more, they can dream more, they can go on dream trips more than others. So they write, but their writing is imaginative, it is not objective. It may help them as a catharsis, that they are unburdened.
But there is another type of literature, totally different, which is objective. These Upanishads were not written for the joy of the writer, they were written for those who were going to read them – they are objective. What they will do to you if you contemplate on them has been planned; every single word has been put there, every single sound has been used. If someone contemplates on it, then the state of the writer will be revealed to him; the same will happen to him if he contemplates. These scriptures are called holy; that’s why.
A totally different body of literature exists in the East, a totally different body – not meant to be enjoyed, but meant to be transforming. And when one has penetrated deep into the meaning of the scriptures…. And these scriptures belong to those who have known. It was thought to be a great sin to write something which you have not known. That’s why very few books were written in the past.
Now every week ten thousand books are written all over the world – every week, ten thousand. And this goes on and on. Now they are worried, because libraries cannot contain such a growing body of literature, so minibooks have to be created, or microfilms of books have to be created so that they can be contained; otherwise soon there will be more libraries than there are houses. And people don’t have shelter, so how can one shelter books? It is becoming almost impossible.
But in the past very few books were written because no one was interested just in writing. Modern authors write because it gives an egoistic feeling that you are an author, everybody knows your name because you have written a book. Your book may be dangerous because it will carry your mind and your germs. If you are ill, then whosoever reads that book will get ill; if you are mad…. Just read Kafka’s books or look at Picasso’s paintings. Try this method with a Picasso painting – you will go mad. Just fix the mind on a Picasso painting, go on staring at it for the inner meaning. Soon you will feel that insanity is arising within you. Picasso is insane, he is putting his insanity on the painting. That is good for him because he is relieved, but not good for you; it is dangerous.

I have heard an anecdote. Once it happened that one of Picasso’s very valuable paintings was stolen, and Picasso was there when the thief came and took the painting, so he had seen the thief. The police asked for particulars, for details of how the thief looked, so he said, “It is difficult to say, but I will paint him.”
So he painted a picture. The police caught twenty persons. Of those twenty persons one was a professor, one was a politician, one was a musician – all types of men. And not only that, it is said that many other things were caught – some machines, and finally the Eiffel Tower!…Because you cannot know what Picasso paints, it is difficult to say what the painting says; it says nothing, or it says so much that it is a confusion.

So don’t try this method on modern writings, you will go mad. Kafka, Sartre, or paintings of Picasso – don’t try this method on them. Only with objective literature can you go deep, because the opposite will be the result. These writings are from those who have known, who have become enlightened, and they have put in these writings their own mind – the mind is hidden there. If you penetrate, the mind will be revealed to you. And only after that…
He lives in the monasteries, ashrams, of saints well established in austerities.
The ashram is an Eastern concept, there is no word to express it in English. “Monastery” is not a good word; ashram is totally different. You have to understand the concept. A monastery is where monks live. There are Christian monasteries – there is no need for an enlightened person to be there; abbots are there, administrators are there. The monastery is like a training school. The abbot need not be enlightened, but he will train you, because they have a curriculum, a course. Christian priests are prepared that way.
I used to visit a Christian theological college. For five years they train the priest there. Everything is conditioned: how much you have to raise your hand when you assert something from The Bible, how you have to make gestures, how loudly you have to speak, and where you have to go slow – everything is trained. They become robotlike and the whole thing is missed.
If you have read about Vivekananda then you will remember this. Vivekananda himself was not an enlightened person, but he impressed America very much – and the reason was not that he was enlightened, the reason was something else. The reason was that he was the only spontaneous person there. All the Christian missionaries, priests, abbots, and big names in Christianity were all disciplined, conditioned, nonspontaneous, robotlike.
So when Vivekananda stood in the American Fair of World Religions, just from the way he stood there, from the way he started, from the first thing when he said, “Brothers and Sisters,” the whole audience was happy – because when you say, “Ladies and gentlemen,” it is something else. No one had addressed the audience there in that fair in that way. Hundreds of speeches were made, and Vivekananda said, “Brothers and sisters….” Immediately the faces of people sitting there changed. Someone was spontaneous, not formal. And whatsoever he said was not very significant, because he was a Hindu sannyasin, untrained.
A monastery is a training school; an ashram is not a school, an ashram is a family. And an ashram doesn’t exist as an institution, cannot exist as an institution. The ashram exists around an enlightened person, that is a basic must. If the enlightened person is not there the ashram disappears; it is the person around whom the ashram can come into being. When the person is dead the ashram has to disappear. If you continue the ashram it becomes a monastery.
For example, Aurobindo is dead and now the Mother is dead – now Pondicherry is a monastery, not an ashram. It will persist as a dead thing, an institute. When Aurobindo was there it was totally different. The person is important, not the institute – institutions are dead. So remember this: a live phenomenon, a master, just by his presence creates a milieu – that milieu is the ashram. And when you move in that milieu you are moving in a family, not in an institute. The master will take care of you in every way, and you will be there in intimate, close proximity.
Eastern ashrams are disappearing, they are becoming monasteries, institutes. The Western mind is so obsessed with institutes that everything is turned into an institute. I was just reading a book on marriage. It begins by saying that marriage is the greatest institute, the greatest institution – but who wants to live in an institute? The ashram is more intimate, more personal.
So every ashram will differ from others, every ashram is going to be unique, because it will depend on the person around whom it has been created. All monasteries will be similar but no two ashrams can be similar, because every ashram has to be individual, unique; it depends on the personality of the master. If you go to a Sufi ashram it will be totally different – much dancing and singing will be there; if you go to a Buddhist ashram, no dancing, no singing, much sitting silently will be there. And both are doing the same, they are leading towards the same goal.
The first thing to remember: an ashram exists with a master; it is his personal influence, his person, the atmosphere, the milieu that he creates through his being. An ashram is his being, and when you enter into an ashram you are not entering into an institution, you are entering a live person, you are becoming part of the soul of the master. Now you will exist as part of the master, he will exist through you. So no forced discipline, but spontaneous happenings will be there.
He lives in the ashrams of saints well established in austerities.
In the third state it is good to move to someone who has known, to live with him. The first two will make you capable, patra; the first two will make you worthy of having a master look at you, of a master allowing you to be in intimacy with him. Without the first two no master will look at you; you will not be allowed, he will avoid you, he will create situations so that you will have to leave his ashram. Only after these two states, when you enter the third, will you be allowed, because a master is not going to waste…. He cannot work with you unless you are ready, and unless you show readiness.
One sannyasin goes on writing letters to me. He is here, he has again written a letter to me, a very long letter, saying, “Give me the method so that I can move into my past lives.” And he is not capable at all even to live in this life! He will go mad if I give him a method to move into the past lives. Why do you think nature prohibits it? Why does nature create a barrier so that you cannot remember the past lives?
Nature is more wise than you. Nature creates the barrier because even one life is too much; it is a burden. You have to forget many things, and if you continuously remember the past life you will be confused, you will be nowhere, you will not be able to decide what is what. Everything will become vague, cloudy, and the past life will remain on your mind like a burden and it will not allow you to live here and now.
Just think, you are in love with a woman and you remember that in the past life she was your mother! So now what will you do? If you go on making love to her you are making love to your mother, and that will create guilt. Or if you think that she is your mother so you should leave her, that will again create guilt because you love her so much. The whole thing will become very difficult and arduous to carry on. And this is how it is happening: your wife may have been your mother, your husband may have been your son, your friend may have been your enemy, your enemy may have been your friend. You have moved in so many lives, it is very complex. Nature creates a barrier: when you die a curtain falls and you cannot remember.
This man goes on writing to me, “Give me a method.” And now he has threatened, “If you don’t give me a method I am going to leave sannyas.” If you leave sannyas, what is it to me? And if I give you a method and you go mad, then who will be responsible? And you will go mad – you are already mad, just on the brink; any step further, a little more burden on the mind and you will explode.
The ashram, or the master, will accept you only when you are ready, and he will start working only when a certain thing can be done to you, you have come to a certain state; nothing can be done before it. And this should be the attitude of the disciple – that he should not ask. The master knows what is to be done and you have to wait. If you cannot wait you have to leave, because nothing can be done when you are not ripe for it.
The first two stages make you ripe to be accepted by a master.
He occupies himself with the discussion of the scriptures, and sleeps on a rocky bed.
This is actual and symbolic both. In the old ashrams everybody had to sleep on a rocky bed – actually also, because it helps. In yoga, your spine, your backbone, is very important, and not only in yoga but in biology also. Now biologists say man could become man because he started standing erect, his backbone erect. Animals’ backbones are parallel to the earth, only man has a backbone which is not parallel to the earth but makes an angle of ninety degrees. This changed the whole being of man, this angle of ninety degrees with the gravitation created the possibility for the mind to develop. Now biologists say that just by standing on two feet the animal became human – because it changes the whole thing. Less blood flows in the head, so the head and the nervous system there can become more delicate and refined. When more blood flows in the head the subtle tissues are broken, they cannot grow.
So don’t do too much shirshasana. Unless a master suggests it to you don’t do shirshasana, because I have never seen a person who has been doing shirshasana who is not stupid. You will become stupid. You will become more healthy of course, because animals are more healthy; so if you are just after health, shirshasana is good, do it forever. You will become healthy like a bull but at the same time stupid also, because when more blood moves into the head delicate tissues are destroyed, and those delicate tissues are needed for intelligence. When man stood erect the possibility developed for more delicate tissues in the head.
You see primitives sleep without pillows, and they will remain primitives if they continue to sleep without pillows, because more blood flows in the night. A more intelligent person will need more pillows. He may not be healthier, but intelligence needs a certain mechanism in the mind, a very delicate mechanism. And mind is very complex; seventy million cells are there, and so delicate, bound to be so delicate, when in such a small head there are seventy million. They are very delicate, very small particles, and when blood flows fast, in great quantity, they are destroyed, they are killed. So biologically, and scientifically also, the spine is the most important thing in man. Your head is nothing but a pole to your spine: you exist as a spine – on one pole is sex, on the other is your mind, and your spine is the bridge.
Yoga worked very much on the spine, because yogis became aware of its significance – that the spine is your life. The angle of ninety degrees will be more exact if your spine is straight, so yogis say that when you sit, sit with a straight spine. They worked out many postures, asanas; all their asanas are based on an erect spine, straight. The straighter it is, the more is the possibility to grow in intelligence, awareness.
You may not have observed: if you are listening to me and you are interested your spine will be straight, if you are not interested then you can relax. If you are looking at a movie in a cinema, whenever something interesting comes you will sit straight immediately, because more mind is called for. When the interesting scene has gone you can relax again into your chair.
In the day the spine has to be erect for yogic postures, and in the night also it has to be trained to be more straight. On a rocky bed it is more straight than on a Dunlop mattress. On a rocky bed it is bound to be straight, because the rocky bed is not going to give way for it. If the spine is erect the whole night it will be-come conditioned to being erect, so in the day also, while walking, sitting, it will remain erect. This is good. So this is physiologically, biologically, and in the eyes of yogis, very helpful. But this is only one part of it, the other part is symbolic.
Whenever a person goes through suffering we say he is lying on a rocky bed. And the ashram is going to be a long suffering, because many old habits are to be broken and they are hard; many old patterns are to be broken and they are very fixed. Really you have to be destroyed and created again, and in between there is going to be suffering and chaos. That is the rocky bed.
With a master you will have to move through much suffering. You have got many blocks in the body and the mind; they have to be destroyed, and to destroy a block is painful. Unless those blocks are destroyed you cannot flow, you cannot become spontaneous, your energy cannot rise high, it cannot move from the sex center to the sahasrar, it cannot move to the ultimate center of your being. So many things have to be destroyed and every habit has a big pattern, its own system – it takes time.
If you are ready and you trust your master it will not take so much time, be-cause trusting him you can pass through suffering. If you don’t trust, then every suffering becomes a problem, and the mind says, “What are you doing here? Why are you suffering here? Leave this man, go away! You were happy before.” You were never happy before, but when suffering starts you will feel that you were happy before.
For the real happiness to happen you will have to throw all suffering, you will have to pass through it – it is part of growth. And when all suffering has been passed through, only then you become capable of bliss; for the first time you can become happy. And there is no other way.
Thus it is that he lives his life. Because he has attained peace of mind, the man of good conduct spends his time in the enjoyment of pleasures that come naturally to him from his excursions into the forest.
This is something very significant. In an ashram, under the guidance of a master, you will have to pass through many sufferings. But you are not to create those sufferings, you are not to be masochistic. Many pleasures will also come. Re-member, this is the type of our mind – that either we are attached to pleasure and then we demand pleasure, or we can even become attached to suffering and then we say we don’t want any pleasure. We start having pleasure through suffering, and that is dangerous. That’s the masochistic attitude – you can torture yourself and you can enjoy it.
This is a very deep phenomenon in the human psyche, and it has happened because of some association. Every pleasure is with some pain, so if pleasure becomes intense you will feel pain, and the reverse is also true: every pain has its own small pleasure, and if the pain becomes intense you will feel pleasure. Pain and pleasure are not really two things, the difference is only of degree.
You love a woman. To be with her for a few hours is beautiful, to be with her for a few minutes is just heavenly, to be with her for a few seconds you feel you are in nirvana. But to be with her for twenty-four hours becomes difficult, and to be with her continuously for months becomes boring, and if you are to be with her for your whole life you would like to commit suicide. Every pleasure has its pain, and every pain has its pleasure. They are not two. They differ in intensity, degrees, but they don’t differ in quality.
And there is another, deeper, association. When you make love…. Love is the most pleasurable thing in the world, naturally – beyond nature there are more pleasures, more blisses, but naturally, biologically, love is the most pleasurable thing. Sex is one of the most pleasant things nature has given to you, but in sex, pain is also involved. When you make love you do many things which give mild pain, but they are good. Even your kiss is a mild pain. You play with each other’s body, and in playing with each other’s body you create a certain pain also. In the Kama Sutra, Vatsyayana has given many clues and suggestions. He says that when really you love a woman, then you will do many things – biting, penetrating your nails into her body – and she will enjoy it. In other circumstances it would be painful, but associated with love it becomes pleasure. But this can go to an extreme, you can become a de Sade.
From de Sade’s name comes the word sadism. De Sade had many devices to torture his beloveds, his mistresses. Nails wouldn’t do, so he had thorns; nails wouldn’t do, so he had iron instruments to penetrate the body. The blood would ooze and he would whip them. He would always travel with a bag with him; in his bag there were all these things. Whenever he found a woman who was ready to love him he would close the door. First he would beat her, blood would start oozing. He would torture the woman and then he would make love. And you will be surprised: he loved many women, and the women, any women that he loved, would declare later on that after de Sade loved them, nobody else has loved that way. He gave them the greatest pleasure, he really loved them.
Even a torture can be pleasurable, because when you beat a person more energy is thrown all over the body, the whole body becomes sexual. When you beat a person the whole body is excited – and then you make love. From the excitement of torture, suddenly the fall in love. It gives a very pleasant sensation…as if first you were hungry, starved, and then came good food – the contrast.
But in every pleasure some torture, some pain, is involved. You can move to the other extreme, you can start giving pain to yourself and can enjoy it. Go to Benares, you will see the monks lying on a bed of thorns. They are enjoying it, it is a sexual pleasure. They have left the pleasure part and retained the pain part.
So in the ashrams you are not to make yourself suffer, not to be a sadist, not to torture yourself. You have to be hard just to break the old habits, but there is no need to seek pain, and if pleasures come by automatically you are allowed to enjoy them. An ashram is not a torture house; if pleasures come by themselves you are allowed to enjoy them. They are good. You have to be thankful for them.
Because he has attained peace of mind, the man of good conduct spends his time in the enjoyment of pleasures that come naturally to him from his excursions into the forest. He remains detached, however, from the objects of desire.
He remains detached. Pleasures come, moments of enjoyment come; he enjoys them and forgets them. He will not demand them again, he will not say, “Now I cannot live without these pleasures.” Whatsoever God gives, one has to be thankful but never demanding. He remains unattached to desire.
Through the ritual of meritorious deeds and the cultivation of right scriptures, he attains that clarity of vision which sees reality. On completing this stage, the seeker experiences a glimpse of enlightenment.
Just a glimpse – not enlightenment. This glimpse is known in Japan as satori. Satori is not samadhi, satori is just a glimpse. You have not reached enlightenment, you have not reached the peak of the hill, but standing in the valley when there are no clouds, when the sky is clear, you can look at the peak with snow caps – but it is very far away still. You cannot see when the sky is clouded, you cannot see when it is night, you cannot see if you are standing at such a point from where it cannot be looked at.
These three steps will bring you to such a viewpoint from where the peak can be glimpsed. These three stages will make your mind clear. The clouds will disappear and the peak will be revealed – but this is a faraway glimpse, this is not enlightenment. At the third stage a glimpse comes, but remember well, don’t think that this is enlightenment. And this can happen even through chemical help also. Through LSD, marijuana, or other drugs also this is possible, because drugs can create such a chemical situation within you, they can force such a chemical situation where for a moment clouds disappear; suddenly you are thrown to a point from where the peak can be glimpsed. But this is no attainment, because chemistry cannot become meditation and chemistry cannot give you enlightenment. When you come back from the trip you are the same again. You may remember it, and that memory may disturb you, and that memory may make you an addict. Then you have to take LSD again and again, and the more you take the less will be the possibility of even the glimpse, because the body gets accustomed and then a greater quantity is needed. Then you are on a path which will lead to insanity and nowhere else.
So don’t try chemical things. If you have tried them, thank God, and don’t try them again. Once you become addicted to chemical help sadhana becomes impossible, because chemicals seem so easy and sadhana seems so difficult. Only sadhana, only spiritual discipline, will help you grow, will give you growth to the point from where the glimpse is not forced but becomes natural. And it is not lost then – any moment you can look, you know from where to look, and the peak will be there. Occupied in your day-to-day activities, any moment you can close your eyes and see the peak and that will become a constant happiness within you, a joy, a continuous joy. Whatsoever you are doing, whatsoever is happening outside, even if you are in misery – for you have built so many jails – you can close your eyes and the peak is there.
After the third stage the glimpse is always available. But the glimpse is not the end – that is only the beginning.

============================================================

Osho,
Is vairagya, nonattachment, a method, a means, an intermediate stage, or an end in itself?
It is all – because means and ends are not two things. The way and the goal are not two things. The way is just the beginning of the goal, and the goal is just the ending of the way. So please, don’t divide, and don’t think in terms of the means being different from the end. Means are the end. Once you can conceive of this, the quality of your effort will change immediately.
Ordinarily mind is always concerned with the end; means are used, exploited, to reach the end. If you could avoid the means you would like to avoid them; if you could achieve the end directly without any means, if you could reach the goal without the way, without the path, you would like to do so. You would like to reach the goal immediately. The mind divides ends and means; end is meaningful, means are just necessary, they have to be suffered.
This is how the ordinary mind functions, and because of this whatsoever you do becomes a suffering – because you have to pass through the path, you have to use means, methods, and therein is all suffering. Happiness is in the goal, somewhere in the future, not here and now. Here and now will be means and the end will be somewhere else, somewhere in the future, tomorrow – so today will always be a suffering.
And remember, if your today is a suffering your tomorrow cannot be a happiness, because it is born of today, it comes out of this moment. The future comes out of the present, so whatsoever the present the same will remain in the future. If you are suffering now you will suffer then also. If you are suffering here you will find the hell there also – because who will find that heaven which you think is there? You? Your whole attitude creates the suffering.
So those who are on the spiritual path must be aware of this tendency of the mind. Forget the end and look at the means as if they are the end, and enjoy them as if they are the goal. Then the very path becomes blissful, the very journey itself becomes blissful. Every step becomes blissful, because you are not waiting for the bliss, for the next step. And out of this blissful step the next is going to be born – it will be more blissful. The tomorrow will be more blissful if today is blissful, and the bliss will grow.
We are doing meditations. These meditations are means, but they are goals also; so don’t try to exploit them, otherwise you will be in a hurry, you will constantly think of how to be finished with them and reach the goal. Then you will never be able to be finished with them and the goal will always remain illusory, always like the horizon, always distant. And the more you move ahead, the goal will also move ahead in the same proportion.
Ends and means are not two things. Don’t divide. The end is just the flowering of the means, the end is just the realization of the means. The end is hidden in the means, just like the tree is hidden in the seed. The seed is the tree. Don’t look at the seed as if the seed has some secondary importance and the tree is meaningful and significant, and you can avoid the seed. If you avoid the seed the tree will never be there. Take care of the seed, love the seed, give soil to it, prepare the ground, and help the seed to grow. It will become the tree. It is already the tree unmanifest.
So let me say it in this way: means are the unmanifest end, and end is the manifest means. Means are seeds, and ends will be the trees, the flowering – so love the means as the end.
Vairagya is all, nonattachment is all. It is the beginning, it is the middle, it is the end. It is a method, it is an intermediate stage, it is the goal. Desirelessness is the end – but the end must be there in the beginning, only then can it grow. So desirelessness is both the first step and the last also. Of course the quality will differ. In the first step the desirelessness will be with effort, in the inter-mediate stage desirelessness will have become unconscious effort. In the beginning it will be conscious effort, you will have to do it; in the middle it will start happening, it will have become unconscious effort. Effort will be there, but indirect, unconscious. In the end it will be spontaneous, effort will have completely disappeared. But desirelessness is the same. Desirelessness in the beginning is with conscious effort, in the middle is with unconscious effort, in the end is effortless.
Avoid this tendency to divide, to cut things, and see that every phenomenon is a continuity, everything is joined together. Even those things which look opposite are also joined together, they are also polarities. Develop this way of looking at things – that will be very helpful. For those who are really sincerely interested in traveling this inner path, this approach of nondividing is a must.

The second question:
Osho,
Are there really discrete stages on the way to the ultimate happening, as this Upanishad seems to suggest, or does this happening occur suddenly and unexpectedly? Is it a matter of long conscious effort, or of a sudden total surrender to existence?
It is both. You have to make all effort that is possible, that you can do. No stone should be left unturned, no energies should be left unused. You must get totally involved. You are required to work as a unit, only then the flowering, the happening, will become possible. But that doesn’t mean that it is an outcome of your effort; just by your effort it is not going to happen. This is a little delicate and you will have to be very penetrating about it, then only will you understand.
Look at it in this way. You see a person walking on the street. Suddenly you have a feeling that you remember the face or you feel that you even know the name, and you say it is just on the tip of your tongue, but it is not coming. The more effort you make the more frustrated you feel – it is not coming. But you cannot leave it at that, because you have the feeling that you know this face, you know the name. And there is even this feeling that somewhere, just in the corner of the mind, the name is waiting, you have only to recall it.
You make all effort, you try in every way. You close your eyes, you contemplate, you ponder over it, you try to associate, you go into the past, you start feeling for some key, some clue, but nothing happens. You get frustrated, bored; you leave the whole effort, and you go into the garden and start working, or you start smoking, or you take a cup of tea. Suddenly the name is there, suddenly the memory has come, suddenly you have recognized.
Now two things are happening. One: you are making every effort possible, but it is not coming through the effort. Then you leave all the effort, and then it comes. Effort is needed but is not enough. If you don’t make any effort it will not come when you go to the garden or when you take a cup of tea. If you have not made total effort it is not going to come. And if you make just the effort – total even – then too it is not going to come. So total effort is needed, then total relaxation also – then it will bubble up.
Many Nobel prizes have been given for certain discoveries which happened in this way. One Nobel prize winner was working on the inner structure of the human cell, the lymph cell. He was working for years, contemplating, brooding, making many experiments, and nothing was happening, every effort was a failure. After many years of research, effort, failure, one night suddenly he had a dream, and in the dream he saw the structure, the very structure he was looking for, the structure of the human cell, just as if a magnified picture was there. He got up. Immediately he drew the drawing and then he worked on it, and it proved that the dream was true.
But remember, you are not going to have this dream, it cannot happen to you. It happened after so many years of effort. The conscious was exhausted. The conscious did everything that could be done and then the conscious was tired, the conscious mind was finished, the conscious accepted the failure. When the conscious is exhausted the unconscious comes into focus and starts working – but it comes only when the conscious is exhausted. If the conscious is still hoping, if the conscious is still trying, then the unconscious will not function. And this is one of the basic laws of the human psyche: that if you want the unconscious to function, exhaust the conscious completely.
Effort will not lead you to enlightenment, but without effort no one has ever achieved it. This may look like a paradox. It is not, it is a simple law.
Buddha tried for six years continuously, and no man has tried as totally as Buddha did. He made every effort possible, he went to every master available. There was not a single master Buddha did not go to. He surrendered to every master, and whatsoever was said he did so perfectly that even the master started feeling jealous. And every master finally had to say to Buddha, “This is all I can teach. And if nothing is happening I cannot blame you, because you are doing everything so perfectly. I am helpless. You will have to move to some other teacher.”
This rarely happens because disciples never do everything so perfectly, so the master can always say, “Because you are not doing well, that’s why nothing is happening.” But Buddha was doing so well, so absolutely well, that no master could say to him, “You are not doing well.” So they had to accept defeat. They had to say, “This is all we can teach, and you have done it and nothing is happening, so it is better you move to some other master. You don’t belong to me.”
Buddha moved for six years, and he followed even absurd techniques when they were taught to him. Somebody said “Fast,” so for months he fasted. For six months he was continuously fasting, just taking a very small quantity of food every fifteen days, only twice a month. He became so weak that he was simply a skeleton. All flesh disappeared, he looked like a dead man. He became so weak that he couldn’t even walk. He finally became so weak that he would close his eyes to meditate and he would fall down in a fit.
One day he was taking a bath in the river Niranjana, just near Bodhgaya, and he was so weak that he couldn’t cross the river. He fell down in the river and he thought that he was going to be drowned; it was the last moment, death had come. He was so weak he couldn’t swim. Then suddenly he caught hold of a branch of a tree and remained there. And there for the first time the thought came to his mind, “If I have become so weak that I cannot cross this ordinary small river in summertime when the water has gone completely, when there is no more water and it is very small, just a little stream – if I cannot cross this little stream, how can I cross this big ocean of the world, bhavasagar? How can I transcend this world? It seems impossible. I am doing something stupid. What to do?”
He came out of the river in the evening and sat under a tree, which became the bodhi tree, and that evening when the moon was coming up – it was a full moon night – he realized that every effort is useless. He realized that nothing can be achieved, the very idea of achievement is nonsense. He had done everything. He was finished with the world, with the world of desires. He was a king and he had known every desire, he had lived every desire. He was finished with them, there was nothing to be achieved, there was nothing worthwhile. And then for six years he had been trying all austerities, all efforts, all meditations, yoga, everything, and nothing was happening. So he said, “Now there is nothing more except to die. There is nothing to be achieved, and every concept of achievement is nonsense; human desire is but futile.”
So he dropped all effort that evening. He sat under the tree, relaxed, with no effort, no goal, nowhere to go, nothing to be achieved, nothing worth achieving. When you are in such a state of mind, mind relaxes – no future, no desire, no goal, nowhere to go, so what to do? He simply sat, he became just like the tree. The whole night he slept, and later on Buddha said that for the first time he really slept that night – because when effort is there it continues in sleep also.
A person who is earning money and who is after money goes on counting even in his dreams, a person who is after power and prestige and politics goes on fighting elections in his dreams. You all know that when you are sitting for an examination in the university or college, in sleep also you go on doing the examination; again and again you are in the examination hall answering questions. So whatsoever effort is there it continues in sleep – and there is always some effort for something or other.
That night there was no effort. Buddha said, “I slept for the first time in millions of lives. That was the first night that I slept.” Such a sleep becomes samadhi. And in the morning when he awoke he saw the last star disappear. He looked. His eyes for the first time must have been mirrorlike, with no content, just vacant, empty, nothing to project. The last star was disappearing, and Buddha said, “With that disappearing star I also disappeared. The star was disappearing and I also disappeared” – because the ego can exist only with effort. If you make some effort ego is fed – you are doing something, you are reaching somewhere, you are achieving something. When there is no effort how can you exist?
The last star disappeared, “And,” Buddha said, “I also disappeared. And then I looked, the sky was vacant; then I looked within, there was nothing – anatta, no self, there was no one.”
It is said Buddha laughed at the whole absurdity. There was no one who could reach. There was no one who could reach the goal, there was no one who could achieve liberation – there was no one at all, no entity. Space was without, space was within. “And,” he said, “at that moment of total effortlessness I achieved, I realized.” But don’t go to relax under a tree, and don’t wait for the last star to disappear. And don’t wait thinking that with the last star disappearing you will disappear. Those six years must precede. So this is the problem: without effort no one has ever achieved, with only effort no one has ever achieved. With effort coming to a point where it becomes effortlessness, realization has always been possible.
This is what I go on emphasizing for you to do: make as much effort as you can, and don’t withhold any energy. Bring your total energy into it so you get exhausted, so the conscious mind cannot make any more effort. When the conscious cannot do anything, suddenly the unconscious reveals. And it reveals only when the conscious has become a total failure, only then it is needed – otherwise it goes on sleeping inside.
It is just like this. Every human body has three layers of energies. The first layer is only for day-to-day work: eating, sleeping, walking to the office, working in the office, coming home, fighting, making love, anger – routine. The first layer. It has not got very much energy, just routine energy.
The second layer is for emergency situations. Unless the first is exhausted the second is not available. You are tired. You have come from the office, the boss has been very insulting. You come home and the wife is very bad-tempered, the children are creating noise, and the whole house is a mess. You feel tired and dead, and suddenly you find that the house has caught fire, it is on fire. Tired-ness disappears immediately. You need not do anything, you don’t even have to take a cup of coffee. Tiredness is no more. The house is on fire, and you have got so much energy that you can work the whole night. From where is this energy coming? The first layer is exhausted, and an emergency is there – the second layer becomes available.
And there is a third layer which is the real source, the source of all energy. You may call it the infinite source, the élan vital. When the second layer is also exhausted, only then the third becomes available. And when the third is available you are totally different: you have become divine, because now the source is infinite, you cannot exhaust it.
We live on the first layer and only sometimes in emergencies, accidents, in some dangerous situations where life is at stake, does the second become available. The third remains almost unavailable. All the effort in spiritual sadhana, discipline, is to exhaust the first. Then austerities, arduous efforts, are to exhaust the second. When the second is exhausted you fall into the ocean, and it can never be exhausted. And from that source, the original source – you may call it God, or whatsoever you like – from that original source, once a contact is made, you are totally different. This is what liberation means, this is what becoming infinite means, this is what Jesus used to call the kingdom of God.
But remember, you cannot just slip into it, it is not available. You have to exhaust the first layer and the second layer, only then it becomes available. Effort is needed to exhaust these layers, and then effortlessness is needed to enter the original source.
So the first thing to be understood: effort is needed, but effort alone is not enough – effort and then effortlessness, effort plus effortlessness. Effort precedes, and then effortlessness follows. Effortlessness is the peak of effort, it comes only when you have reached the peak. And this is so difficult to conceive that there are many misunderstandings.
In Japan, Zen, which is an offshoot of the Indian dhyana, says no effort is need-ed. And it is right. Because of this Zen has become very influential in the West. And the West has created its own Zen writers – they are Zen writers, not Zen masters. And it has much appeal; no effort is needed, you can become enlightened without any effort. So in the West there are many Zen writers, Zen painters, Zen haiku poets – and they are all bogus, because they have taken this idea.
This idea is very appealing, that there is no need of any effort. If there is no need of any effort, then as you are you are a master, you are enlightened, you have become a siddha. But then look at the Zen monasteries in Japan. If you read Zen scriptures, there it is written that there is no need of effort. But then go to the Zen monastery and look: for twenty years, thirty years, a seeker has to make all the efforts. Then the moment comes when that scripture becomes applicable – then, no effort.
Effort will lead you to no effort, and this is a basic law. You can understand if you try to observe your own life. For example, if in the day you have been working hard, sleep will be deep in the night. If you have been working hard, exerting hard, then sleep will be good. If you have slept well in the night, then in the morning you will be capable of doing much hard work again. Hard work is against relaxation, it is the opposite. This would be more logical – that you sleep the whole day, rest, and then in the night you fall into deeper sleep because you have been practicing sleep the whole day. This should be the logic – that a man who has been practicing sleep the whole day must sleep better in the night than others who have not been practicing so much.

Mulla Nasruddin once went to his doctor. He had a cold and had been coughing for many days. As he was entering his doctor’s office he coughed. The doctor heard and said, “Nasruddin, it sounds better.”
Nasruddin said, “Of course it must because I have been practicing for three months.”

But logic is not life. If you sleep and rest the whole day you will not be able to rest at all in the night. That’s what is happening with rich people in affluent societies. Insomnia is a luxury, not everybody can afford it. To attain insomnia you have to rest for the whole day. If you can afford that much rest, only then is insomnia possible. A poor man cannot afford it. He has to fall in deep sleep, he is helpless. He has been working hard the whole day.
But work is against rest, so it is not logical – but this is the logic of life. Life depends on opposites, life depends on opposite polarities. Logic is linear, life is polar. Logic moves in a line, life moves in a circle. So a person who has been relaxing will not be able to relax in the night, a person who has been working hard the whole day will be able to relax.
Or look at it from another angle. A person who is always loving, never angry, really cannot be loving. Ordinary logic will say that a person can be loving in the morning, loving in the noon, loving in the evening, loving in the night; always loving in summer, always loving in winter – every season, every moment loving. This love is not humanly possible, because the opposite is needed. He must sometimes become angry. That anger relaxes, that anger becomes the valley and then peaks of love can arise again.
If you want only peaks and no valleys, you are mad. Only peaks cannot exist. With every peak at least two valleys will be needed, and only between two valleys is one peak possible. So a person who is always loving is possible only in two ways. One is that he is not human. That means he must be a buddha, who can be always loving. But then his love cannot have any intensity, his love will be very silent. His love will not be like a peak, it will be just plain straight ground.
That’s why a buddha’s love can only be called compassion, it cannot be called love. There is no passion in it, it is compassion. There can be no intensity in it, because intensity comes from the opposite. A buddha is never angry, so from where can the intensity come?
In ordinary life you have to be angry, then you regain love. In marriage there is no need for the final divorce if every day you can divorce a little. In the morning divorce, in the evening remarriage, then things move beautifully. And if you go on postponing this everyday divorce then finally you will have to break, then separation is a must. Life is polarity, and this applies to everything. Effort plus effortlessness – they are the polar opposites. The ultimate is reached through effort and effortlessness, so don’t cling to one – remember both.
Both the parties exist; there are a few persons who go on clinging to the method, effort, and then they go on making effort. Even if nirvana has been reached they cannot be stopped. They will go on breathing, they will say, “We cannot stop. Effort is needed.” So even if God is standing before them they will go on doing chaotic breathing; they will not look, they will not look and see what has happened. They are too much attached to the method and the effort.
And then there is the other polar opposite party. They say, “If no effort is needed then why breathe at all?” So they are sitting just waiting for the last star to disappear so that they can become buddhas. Both are wrong. You have to breathe and you have to stop also. You have to make all efforts and then relax also. If these are both possible, only then will you create the rhythm through which every growth becomes possible.
The second thing: “Are there really discrete stages on the way to the ultimate happening, as this Upanishad seems to suggest?”
There are no stages. Life cannot be divided. But without division there is no possibility for you to understand. I call this part of my body my hand; this part of my body my head – but can they be divided? Where my head begins and where it ends – can you draw the line? Nowhere can the line be drawn. Where my legs end, where my hand ends – can you draw a line? No line can be drawn, because inside I am one – my hands, my legs, my head, they are one. But we have to divide to understand. Division is just to help understanding, it is not actual fact.
So this Upanishad is dividing, not because divisions are there, but because you will not be able to understand the whole. The whole will be too much, too complex. The whole will be incomprehensible, and understanding will not be possible. That’s why the division into seven stages, and that’s why there are so many divisions. You can divide in fourteen, you can divide in seventeen – you can divide into as many as you like. And theologians go on fighting about these divisions. They are workable, utilitarian – not existential.
Just feel your body, close your eyes and feel. Where are the divisions? It is one. But if your eyes are not functioning well you will go to the eye specialist. And you know that eyes are not separate, they are one with the body, so then why go to the eye specialist? You can go to any doctor. The eye specialist has tried to understand eyes…because eyes in themselves are such a big, such a complex phenomenon, that just to understand those eyes medical science has divided the body in parts. There are millions of parts in the body, and as science grows more divisions have to be made. But those divisions are just workable, utilitarian – you are not divided.

I have heard one story. Once it happened, one master had two disciples and they both were always competing. Who was the head, who was the chief disciple, was always the competition and the problem. And they were always competing with each other to gain the master’s heart.
One summer afternoon the master was tired and was sleeping. The disciples wanted to serve him, to massage his body, so the master said, “Okay. Number one, you take my left side. Number two, you take my right side and massage.” The master fell asleep. They drew a line with chalk on his body, because one should not enter into the other’s territory.
But it happened the master was not aware that he had been divided. He was fast asleep, and he didn’t know that now he was not one, but two. So he moved in his sleep, and put his right leg on his left. The disciple to whom the left leg belonged said, “Take away your right leg. Remove it immediately! You are interfering with my work. This is a transgression!”
But the other said, “I cannot remove it. I have not put it on your leg. And if you have any courage, then remove it yourself and see what happens!”
Now they were standing with two sticks, and they were almost going to beat the master. Suddenly the master became aware that something was wrong, so he asked, “What is happening?”
Both said, “You need not interfere. Remain silent and go to sleep. We will decide by ourselves.”

All divisions are workable, life remains one. The path and the goal and the stages, they are just to help you, so don’t take them dogmatically and don’t take them literally. These seven stages are just to help you, to give you a view of the whole path. When you have understood forget that they are seven. But until you have understood follow the division. When you have understood forget the division – it is one progression, one flow.
And thirdly: “Does this happening occur suddenly and unexpectedly?”
Both things can be said. It cannot be predicted, so it happens suddenly. Nobody can say when it will happen. My own disciples go on asking me, “When? Give the date, the day, the month, the year!” And I have to go on lying to them. I go on saying, “Soon!” Soon doesn’t mean anything. And soon is a beautiful word, because I need never change it. Whenever you ask I will say, “Soon!”
The happening is unpredictable because it is so vast a phenomenon. And it is not mechanical, it is not mathematical, so you cannot conclude about it. And it is very mysterious; when it has happened, only then you know that it has happened. So in a sense, because it is unpredictable it is always sudden. Even you don’t know when it will happen. Suddenly one day when it has happened you become aware that it has happened. Not even a single moment before will you be aware that this is going to happen. You will become aware only when it has happened already. Then you will feel that you are no more the same, the man who was there has disappeared and a new man is there in his place – somebody new. You are unacquainted, you cannot recognize yourself. There has been a gap, the old continuity has been broken and something new has come into its place.
Even your master cannot predict it. He may become aware that something is going to happen, but he cannot predict it. There are problems – because even the prediction will change the whole situation. This is the problem, even the prediction will change it. If I become aware that something is going to happen to you tomorrow morning, I cannot say it because that will change the whole situation. If I say, “Tomorrow morning this is going to happen,” you will become tense and you will start expecting and you will start waiting. You will not be able to sleep in the night. Then the whole thing is finished, then it is not going to happen tomorrow morning.
Even if your master becomes aware…because there are signs that show that something is going to happen. Your master can see that you are pregnant, he can feel, but it is not such a fixed affair that within nine months the child will be born. You may take nine years, you may take nine lives, you may not take even nine days; even nine moments may be enough. It depends, and it depends on such multidimensional things that nothing can be said. And if something is said, the very assertion will change the whole situation. So the master has to wait, just watch and not say anything.
In this sense it is sudden, but in another sense it is not sudden, because you have to make efforts for it, you have to prepare. You have to prepare the ground, you have to open the doors. The guest may come suddenly, but if your doors are closed he may come and go back. So you have to open the doors, you have to clean the house, you have to prepare food for the guest – you have to be ready. You have to watch and wait at the door – any moment the guest can come.
Jesus goes on telling one anecdote many times. Once it happened, a great landlord went on a journey. He told all his slaves and servants, “Be alert constantly. Even in the night the house must be ready because I can come any moment. In the morning, in the afternoon, in the evening, at midnight – any moment I can come, and my house must be ready, waiting for me. So twenty-four hours you have to watch and wait. Don’t go to sleep!”
And so the servants had to wait and watch. There was no difference between day and night – the master could come any moment.
Jesus used to say, “Your master also can come any moment – you have to be ready. And if you are ready, your readiness also becomes a factor for his coming soon. If you are completely ready he may come back from midjourney. If your whole being is calling him, inviting him, he may come this very moment.”
The happening can happen any moment if you are ready. It is sudden because unpredictable; it is sudden because you cannot plan, calculate; it is sudden because it is not mechanical. But still you have to prepare for it, you have to be ready for it, and you have to do much before it can happen.
It is just as if you sow a seed in the ground. You prepare the ground and sow the seed – the right seed in the right season in a right place – and then wait. The sprouting will be sudden, you cannot determine it. You cannot say that on Mon-day morning the sprout will be there. It may not be, it may be, because millions of factors are working. Now scientists say that even music helps. If somebody is dancing and singing near that ground where you have sown the seed, it may help the seed to sprout quickly. If the moon is rising it will help the seed to sprout soon. If the moon is declining it will take more time.
You may not be aware that full moon night is different from any other night. More children are born on full moon night, more than on any other night. The highest number of children born is on the full moon night, and the lowest number is on the no-moon night. That factor goes on working; the whole constellation goes on working – every star is a factor. Even a beggar sitting there near your house and singing will help. If somebody passes, sad, miserable, the seed is affected; that sadness hinders.
There are millions of factors, unpredictable, complex, mysterious – but still you have to prepare everything. So don’t wait for the sudden. “Sudden” doesn’t mean that you need not do anything and it will happen any moment, suddenly. You will have to prepare, and then too it will happen suddenly. Your preparation will help, but it cannot plan, it cannot force.

The third question:
Osho,
In the past hypnosis has been tried on me, but I could not be hypnotized. Please explain why many persons are not hypnotizable.
This will be important for you to understand. Ordinarily it is thought that those persons who cannot be hypnotized are powerful. This is absolutely wrong – and I say absolutely. The stronger the person the more easily he is hypnotized. The second wrong conception is that a very intelligent person cannot be hypnotized. That too is absolutely wrong. The more stupid a person the less is the possibility of hypnotizing him. You cannot hypnotize an idiot – impossible. You cannot hypnotize a madman – impossible. The more intelligent a person the more easily he can be hypnotized.
Why? – because hypnosis needs cooperation; the basic factor is cooperation, your cooperation. The idiot cannot understand what you are demanding, what type of cooperation; the madman cannot understand what you are demanding. Only an intelligent person can cooperate, and hypnosis is possible only when you cooperate. So if you are paranoid, schizophrenic, neurotic, you cannot cooperate. If you are very much afraid, a fear complex is there, you cannot cooperate.
A person who can trust can be hypnotized easily. A person who cannot trust anybody cannot be hypnotized – because the person who is hypnotizing is not using any force on you. This is again a wrong conception, the third, that the hypnotist is using some force. No, not at all. The hypnotist has no force to use; the hypnotist is only using your force, so you have to cooperate. If you don’t cooperate nobody can hypnotize you. And cooperation needs trust, because you will be unconscious and you don’t know what this man who is hypnotizing will do to you.
So look, I have been experimenting on many things. A Western woman is more easily hypnotized than an Eastern woman, because the Eastern woman is always afraid of sex. When she is unconscious, who knows what this hypnotist may do? Western women in that sense have become freer, less afraid. They can be hypnotized more easily.
A person who is guilty about something is very difficult to hypnotize, be-cause he is always afraid that when he is unconscious the thing he is hiding may come up. A person who has committed some sin, or thinks he has committed some sin and is hiding it, will be very difficult to hypnotize. Only a simple, innocent person can be hypnotized, because he has nothing to hide. You cannot bring anything out; he has no secrets. If you have secrets and you don’t want them to be exposed you cannot trust anybody – because hypnosis means that your unconscious is available to the hypnotist. He can penetrate deep down, he can bring out anything that you are hiding.
So those persons are not hypnotizable who fall into these categories. The less guilty and less afraid, and the more intelligent, trusting and cooperative a person is, the more hypnotizable. So don’t think that if you cannot be hypnotized you are something great. You may be simply ill, pathological. If you can be hypnotized you show a quality of trust and you show that you are imaginative. You show that suggestions can catch you and your imagination can work through them. You are an imaginatively creative person.
But remember that unless you cooperate nobody can hypnotize you – nobody. Even if Mesmer comes he cannot hypnotize you if you don’t cooperate. Your cooperation is needed, your total willingness is needed. And then too you are not completely in the control of the hypnotist. A part of you remains alert even then, and if the hypnotist is going to force you to do something against yourself you will suddenly come out of hypnosis.
It happened, one of my brothers was serving in an office. He trusts me, and I wanted him to leave that service. But he is such a person that whatsoever the situation he does not like to change it. He was not getting good pay, the office was in every way useless, there was no possibility for creative growth, so I was saying to him, “Leave that office.” But he is the type that wants to continue whatsoever is going on with no change. So I hypnotized him.
He trusts me in every way, but that day he was mistrustful, because he was aware that if he was hypnotized I was going to say, “Leave that service!” Every-thing was okay, he followed, but a part of him must have remained aware, alert, in case I suggested that thing. So he followed everything, he didn’t even feel the pin. I tested in every way and he was hypnotized completely, there was no possibility that he wasn’t. And then I said, “Leave that service!” Immediately he came out of hypnosis and he said, “Don’t say that!”
Nothing, even in hypnosis, can be forced on you if you are not willing; even after hypnosis has happened nothing can be forced upon you. So if something can be forced that shows that unconsciously you were willing.
For example, a woman who cannot think of kissing any man other than her lover – if it is suggested to her under hypnosis to kiss somebody else, and if really she does not want to kiss anybody, immediately she will come out of hypnosis. But if she goes and kisses the other person, and then after she has come out of hypnosis you tell her and she says, “What could I do? I was hypnotized,” then this is just a trick – unconsciously she wanted to kiss him.
Consciously she is alert and she will say, “No, I cannot touch any other man than my own lover. I belong to one,” but this is only conscious – unconsciously she must have been hankering. Only then, in hypnosis, can this be forced; otherwise in hypnosis also this cannot be forced, it is impossible. You have to cooperate with whatsoever the hypnotist forces on you. The moment your cooperation is taken back, immediately hypnosis disappears. So many reasons are possible why a person is not hypnotizable, but don’t think of it as a good quality. Become more imaginative, cooperative, trusting, and hypnosis can be helpful.
In the old days, particularly in the East, hypnosis was used in every ashram. The master used it in every way to help you, because consciously you may take years to do a particular thing but in hypnosis, through hypnosis, within seconds it can be done. Unnecessary effort can be saved. But only masters were allowed to hypnotize. Hypnosis remained a secret science in the East; it was not used publicly because there are possibilities of misusing it.
In the West Mesmer brought hypnosis into the market, and then everything which was associated with it became condemned. But now again the wheel is turning. In the West also universities are studying it; there are scientific projects to study hypnosis, and new research is again bringing hypnosis to the status of a science. It can be used now, it is already used, in hospitals in surgery – because there is no need to give an anesthetic; that is destructive to the body, it unnecessarily harms the body. There is no need, simple hypnosis can make you unconscious. There is no need for chloroform or any poison, any gas, to make you unconscious; only your cooperation is needed. And any operation is possible under hypnosis. Even if it takes hours, even if many hours are needed, hypnosis is enough, no anesthetic is needed.
Many hospitals have started using it. Childbirth can be made absolutely painless; not only that, it can easily be made pleasurable, ecstatic, under hypnosis. The mother just has to cooperate and trust, and then she can be hypnotized and it can be suggested that there will be no pain when the child comes out of the womb, but rather on the contrary there will be intense pleasure. And it is possible that the woman, the mother giving birth, can have such a deep orgasm through birth that no sexual orgasm can be any comparison to it – because the same mechanism is involved. The same mechanism which gives the sexual orgasm, the bliss that comes through sex, is involved, and involved more totally. The child passes through the same passage.
Once the woman feels – and the suggestion is there – that this is going to be a very ecstatic feeling, she will achieve a peak. And I think that in the past women used to achieve that peak; they have lost that capacity. Not only lost – birth has become painful. This is again a suggestion.
You can see: the more civilized a society, the more pain in childbirth; the less civilized a society, the less pain. In India there are many primitives who don’t know any pain in childbirth, no pain at all. And there are some tribes on the earth even today in Tibet and in other interior parts of Mongolia, where women go simply mad in ecstasy when the child is born. And that may be the reason why every woman deeply longs to be a mother. No man longs to be a father, he wants to be a husband; no woman simply longs to be a wife, she wants to be a mother. That’s a basic difference.
I think the reason is that in the old days, in very ancient days, women used to achieve the supreme pleasure of their life through childbirth. That has remained in their unconscious still – they want to be a mother. A father is just a formality. You don’t achieve anything through becoming a father; you don’t give any birth, you are just a spectator. So the father is just a social convention. The mother is a natural phenomenon. The father can be discarded any day, it is just institutional; the mother is a natural phenomenon.
Every woman longs to be a mother, only then does she feel fulfilled. This feeling must be based on some ecstasy that was there in the beginning and which women have lost. It is just a suggestion that childbirth is painful, but through centuries it has gone deep. It can be changed.
Many illnesses can simply disappear through hypnosis because really they don’t exist, they are just in your mind. Fifty percent of illnesses are just in the mind, they don’t have any organic existence. They can simply disappear. There is no need for any medicine, any injection or any “pathies” to be worked on you, because then those medicines poison you, your body goes toxic, and then you suffer. You suffer less from your illnesses, more from your medicines. And there are so many doctors that you can escape death but you cannot escape the doctors – they will kill you in the end. Whatsoever you do they will kill you. Fifty percent of diseases can simply disappear from the earth.
Hypnosis is a great force, but with every force there is danger – it can be misused. But just because a force can be misused you need not go against it…because anything can be misused, and if it can be misused that shows it can be used also. So become more vulnerable, become more suggestible, become more available to hypnosis. That means you will become more intelligent, more cooperative, more trusting.

============================================================

There are two kinds of nonattachment:
the ordinary and the sublime.
That attitude of nonattachment to the objects of desire in which the seeker knows that he is neither the doer nor the enjoyer,
neither the restrained nor the restrainer, is called ordinary
nonattachment. He knows that whatever faces him in this life
is the result of the deeds of his past life.
Whether in pleasure or in pain, he can do nothing.
Indulgence is but a disease and affluence of all kinds a storehouse of adversity. Every union leads inevitably to separation.
The ignorant suffer the maladies of mental anxiety.
All material things are perishable, because time is constantly
devouring them. Through the understanding of scriptural precepts, one’s faith in material things is uprooted
and one’s mind freed of them.
This is called ordinary nonattachment.

When thoughts like: “I am not the doer, my past deeds are the doers, or God himself is the doer,” cease to worry the seeker,
a state of silence, equilibrium and peace is attained.
This is called sublime nonattachment.
On the path, in the search, every step has two sides: the beginning of the step, and the conclusion. The beginning will always be with conscious effort, it is bound to be so. A struggle will be there, constant need to be alert will be there. Sometimes you will fall, sometimes you will fall asleep, sometimes you will forget, sometimes you will go astray. Again and again you will have to remember, come back to the path. Again and again you will have to make more intense effort to be conscious.
So the beginning of every step will be struggle. There will be ups and there will be downs. Sometimes you will feel very miserable, frustrated; whenever the contact with the method is lost, whenever you have gone astray, frustration will happen, you will feel depressed, sad, lost. There will be moments of intense happiness also. Whenever you regain the control again, whenever even for moments you become the master, whenever even for small glimpses you become capable, you will feel intense joy spreading all over your being.
Peaks and valleys will be there. They will disappear only when the conscious effort has disappeared, when the method is no more a method, when the method has become your very consciousness, when you need not remember it, when you can completely forget it and it still grows, continuous, flows, when you need not maintain it, when you need not even think of it – and then it becomes spontaneous, sahaj. This is the end aspect of every step. Remember this: through constant practice a moment comes when you can drop the practice completely, and unless you can drop the practice you have not attained.
Taoist masters have used many dimensions: poetry, painting, and many other crafts have been used as training grounds. Painting has been used for centuries in China and Japan. Taoist painting has a principle, and that principle is that first one should become proficient in painting, in the technique of painting – it takes many years – and then for a few years one has to drop painting completely. One has to forget that one is a painter; throw the brushes, colors, inks, and just drop from the mind that one has learned something. For a few years one has to be completely away from painting. When the thought has dropped, then again the master says, “Now you start.” Now this man is not a technician. He knows the technique but he is not a technician, because there is no need to be aware of the technique. Now he can paint like a small child. The effort has ceased, to paint has become effortless. Only then master-teachers are born.

I remember one story I would like to tell you. It happened once in Burma that a great temple was to be built, and the main door had to be something unique on the earth. So many painters, Zen masters, Taoist masters, were asked, and the one who was the greatest was invited to design the door. That great master had a habit that whenever he would paint something, design something, his chief disciple would sit by his side, and whenever he would complete the design he would ask the chief disciple whether it was okay. If the disciple said no he would throw the design and he would again work on it. Unless the disciple said, “Right, this is the thing,” he would go on.
Designing this main gate of the temple became a problem, because the chief disciple continued to say no. The master painted at least one hundred designs. Many months passed. He would work for weeks, and when the design was complete he would look at the disciple who was sitting beside him. The disciple would shake his head and he would say, “No,” and the master would put aside the design and start again. He was also worried, “What is going to happen? When will this design be complete?” – and he had been doing hard work such as he had never done in his life.
Then one day it happened. The ink with which he was painting was almost finished, so he told the disciple to go out of the house and prepare more ink. The disciple went out to prepare the ink, and when he came back he started dancing in ecstasy and he said, “Now this is the thing! But why couldn’t you paint it before?”
The master said, “Now I know. I was also worried, what was happening? Now I know, your presence was the disturbance. In your presence I remained the technician. I was aware that I was doing something, effort was there; I was conscious of the effort, and I was thinking, expecting, that this time you would say yes. That was the disturbance. I could not be spontaneous. When you went out I could forget you, and when I could forget you I could forget myself also.”…Because the self is the reaction to the other. If the other is in your consciousness you will remain the ego. They both drop simultaneously; when the other has disappeared, the ego has disappeared.
“And when I was not,” the master said, “the painting flowed by itself. This design I have not done. All those hundred designs you rejected were my doings. This design is through Tao, through nature; it has dropped from the cosmos itself. I was just a vehicle. I could forget and become a vehicle.”

When you can forget the method, the effort, the self, the other, when everything has been dropped and you have become simply a flow of energy, spontaneous, then really something is attained – not before. And look at the difference in the Eastern and Western attitudes about painting, and about everything else also. In the West you have to make conscious effort and bring the effort to a peak. You become a technician and the other part is missing. In the East you have to become a technician, and then drop that whole technicality and become again innocent, simple, as if you were never trained.
Once somebody asked Winston Churchill, one of the greatest orators the West has produced, “Don’t you get afraid of the audience? Thousands of people staring at you – don’t you get afraid, scared? Don’t you get a little fear inside?”
Churchill said, “This has been my constant practice: that whenever I stand to speak I look at the audience and I think, ‘So many fools!’ The moment this thought comes to my mind I am okay, then I don’t worry.”
Somebody asked the same question of a Zen master, Rinzai: “You speak to thousands, don’t you ever get worried about it? Don’t you ever get scared? Don’t you ever get an inner trembling? – because so many persons are present, judging, observing, looking at you.”
Rinzai said, “Whenever I look at people I say, ‘I am sitting there also. Only I am in this hall.’ Then there is no problem. I am alone, these people are also me.”
This is the Eastern and Western difference. Churchill represents the West: if others are fools then you are okay, then the ego is strengthened. You don’t worry about them, because who are they? – nobodies. And Rinzai says: The other is not. They are just me, my forms. I am alone. I am the speaker and I am also the audience. Then what is the fear?”
In your bathroom when you are alone you can be a good singer – everybody is, almost everybody. And bring the same man out of the bathroom, let him stand here, and the moment he sees you he is no more capable of singing – even humming becomes impossible. The fear grips the throat; he is not alone, the others are there, they will judge. The moment the other is there fear has entered. But the same man was humming beautifully, singing beautifully in the bathroom – nobody was there.
The same happens when you can see in the other your own self. Then the whole earth is your bathroom; you can sing, you can dance. The other is no more there, there is nobody to judge. Through these eyes you are looking, and through others’ eyes also you are looking. Then it becomes a cosmic play of one energy in many forms. But the ultimate of any method is to become methodless, the ultimate of every technique is to become nontechnical, innocent. All effort is only to attain an effortless spontaneity.
There are two kinds of nonattachment: the ordinary and the sublime.
The ordinary is the first aspect of vairagya, nonattachment. The sublime is the spontaneous, the end; the other aspect of the same when things have be-come spontaneous.
That attitude of nonattachment to the objects of desire in which the seeker knows that he is neither the doer nor the enjoyer, neither the restrained nor the restrainer, is called ordinary nonattachment.
The emphasis is on the word knows. He has to maintain that, he has to remember it: “I am not the doer. I am just a witness. Whatsoever happens I am not involved. I am an outsider, just a spectator.” But this has to be remembered, this has to be maintained. This point must not be lost. And it is very difficult to remember it constantly. To remember even for a few minutes is difficult, be-cause for many many lives you have been the doer, constantly you have been the enjoyer.
When you are eating you are the eater, when you are walking you are the walker, when you are listening you are the listener. You have never made any effort to remember that while doing anything you are not the doer but the witness. While eating, try it. The food is going into the body, not into you. It cannot go into you, there is no way, because you are the consciousness and the food cannot enter consciousness. It will go into the body, it will become the blood and the bone, whatsoever the body needs, but you remain a witness.
So while sitting at your table eating your food, don’t be the eater. You have never been the eater; this is just an old habit, an old conditioning. Look at the eater, the body, and the eaten, the food, and you be the third. You just witness, you just hover above, you just look from a distance. Stand aloof and see your body eating, the food being eaten, and don’t get involved in it. But you can maintain it only for a few seconds – again you will become the eater. It has been such a long, long conditioning; it will take time to break it.
You are walking on the street. Don’t be the walker, just watch the body walking. For a few seconds you may remember; again you will forget and you will enter in the body and become the walker. But even if for a few seconds you can maintain it, you can remember that you are not the walker, then those few seconds will become satori-like, those few seconds will be weightless, those few seconds will be of a joy such as you have never known. And if this can happen for a few seconds, why not for ever?
Somebody is insulting you – it will be more difficult than with walking or eating to remember that you are the witness. One Indian mystic, Ram Teerth, went to America in the beginning of this century. He never used the word ‘I’, he would always use the name Ram. If he was hungry he would say, “Ram is hungry.” It looked unfamiliar and strange. If there was a headache he would say, “Ram has a headache.”
One day it happened that a few people insulted him. He came back laughing and his disciples asked, “Why are you laughing?”
So he said, “Ram was insulted very much, and I enjoyed. I was standing out of Ram and looking. Ram was in much difficulty; much inconvenience, discomfort, was there in Ram.”
You become an object of your own consciousness. This is coming out of the body, out of the ego, out of the mind. This is difficult not because it is unnatural, this is difficult only because of a long conditioning. You may have observed that small babies in the beginning never say ‘I’; they say, “Baby is hungry.” They seem to be witnessing the phenomenon. But we train them to use the ‘I’ because it’s not good to say, “Baby is hungry,” or “Baby wants to play.” We train them to use the ‘I’.
‘I’ is not existential, ‘I’ is a social entity; it has to be created. It is just like language: it is needed because if people go on speaking like babies or like Ram Teerth, if like Ram Teerth people go on saying their names, it will be very difficult to say whether they are talking about themselves or about somebody else. It will create confusion. If you say, “I am hungry,” immediately it is meant that you are hungry. If you say, “Ram is hungry,” if people know that you are Ram then it’s okay; otherwise they will think somebody else is hungry, not you. And if everybody uses it, it will create confusion.
It is a social convenience to use the ‘I’; but this social convenience becomes truth, it becomes the center of your being, a false thing. The ‘I’ never existed, can never exist. But just because of social utility the child is trained, the consciousness becomes fixed around a center which is just utilitarian, not existential – and then you live in an illusion. And the whole life of a person who has not come to know that there is no ego will be false, because it is based on a false foundation.
To be a witness means to drop the ‘I’. The moment you can drop the ‘I’, immediately you become the witness. Then there is nothing else to do, you can only be the witness. This ‘I’ creates the problem. Hence the emphasis of all religions to become egoless, to be egoless, to be humble, not to be proud, not to be conceited about it. Even if you have to use it, use it as a symbol. You have to use it, but use it knowingly – knowing that this is just a social convenience.
That attitude of nonattachment to the objects of desire in which the seeker knows that he is neither the doer nor the enjoyer, neither the restrained nor the restrainer, is called ordinary nonattachment.
When you become capable of remembering that you are the witness, this is the first stage of nonattachment.
He knows that whatever faces him in this life is the result of the deeds of his past life.
Try to see that whatsoever action is there, it is not arising out of you but rather arising out of the chain of actions you have done in the past. Try to understand this distinction clearly. Whenever you do something – if somebody insults you, you think that the reaction is arising from you. That is wrong. It is arising not from you but from the chain of your mind which has come from the past. You have been trained in the past that this is an insulting word.

I will tell you one anecdote. Kahlil Gibran writes somewhere that one man came to Lebanon. He was not a Lebanese, he didn’t know the language of the country; he was totally a stranger. The moment he entered Lebanon he saw a very big palatial building, many people coming in and out, so he also entered to see what was going on there. It was a big hotel, but he thought, “It seems the king has given a party – so many distinguished guests coming out, going in, and everybody is being served.” And, as the human mind works, he thought, “It may be that because I have come to Lebanon, just for my reception, in my honor, the king is doing something.”
The moment he entered he was received by the manager, he was placed at a table and food was served. He enjoyed it and he was very happy, he had never been so happy in his life. And then when he had finished his food, drink, and everything, he started thanking them. But they could not understand his language and he could not understand their language. They were placing a bill before him – it was a hotel – but he couldn’t understand. He thought, “They are giving in writing, ‘It was so good of you to accept the invitation. You have honored us.’” So he took the bill, put it in his pocket, and thanked them again.
Then the manager became disturbed: either he was insane, because he was talking in such strange sounds they couldn’t understand, or he was a rascal just trying to deceive. So he was brought to the owner of the hotel. The man thought, “Now they are bringing me to the chief minister or the prime minister of the country.” He again started thanking them. It was no use, so he was brought to the court.
When he entered the palatial building of the court, bigger than the hotel, he thought, “Now this is the palace of the king, and he himself is going to receive me in person.” Again he started bowing down and thanking, and the magistrate thought, “This man is either mad or a perfect rascal,” so he punished him. And it was the punishment of that country in such cases that the man should be forced to sit on a donkey backwards, and a plaque should be hung around his neck on which it was written: “This man has committed the crime of deception, and everybody should be aware.”
He was painted black, and he enjoyed it very much because he thought, “A strange country, with strange manners, but they are paying every attention to me.” Naked he was placed on a donkey, a plaque was hung around his neck. He enjoyed it. Then the donkey started moving all over town just to make the whole town aware that this man was a criminal. And a crowd, children and many cripples followed, and he enjoyed. He thought, “These people are just following in my honor.” The children were enjoying it and he was also very happy and joyful, but only one sadness was in his heart: “Nobody knows what is happening to me in my country. I wish they could become aware of how I have been received. And they will not believe me when I go back, they will say that I am just inventing stories.”
Then suddenly he saw a man in the crowd who belonged to his country. He was very happy and he said, “Look how beautifully they have received me! This is not only in my honor, but my country is honored.” But the other man who knew the language of this country, Lebanon, simply disappeared in the crowd, hiding his face, because he knew what was happening. This was not an honor. And the man on the donkey thought, “Jealousy, nothing else. This man is jealous. They have honored me and they have not honored him.”

You have a mind trained through many lives. Things come out of that, not out of you. You have a long chain of actions; whenever a new act is born in you it comes out of that chain. It is a new link in that chain; it is born out of that chain, not out of you. When somebody insults you, you get angry. That anger comes from your past angers, not from you.
This difference has to be noted, because it will help you to become a witness. And that is what is meant by living moment-to-moment – that is the moment. Don’t allow the chain of the past to react. Put aside the chain and let your consciousness function directly. Don’t be influenced by the past, respond here and now, directly. The whole life will be different if you can act out of the present moment. But all your actions are almost always out of the past, never out of the present. And action that is born out of the present is nonbinding, an action that is born out of the past chain is a new link in your bondage. But first one has to become aware.
When you get angry just look: from where is that anger coming? from you or just from your past memories? You have been insulted before, you have been angry before – that memory is there waiting, that memory works like a wound. Again something happens and that memory starts functioning, that memory creates the same reaction again. If you watch and observe for twenty-four hours you will see that you are just a mechanical robot, you are functioning out of memories, out of the past. The past is dead, and the dead is so weighty on you that your life is crushed under it. Look at the chain. This sutra says:
He knows that whatever faces him in this life is the result of the deeds of his past life.
Not only that his reactions come from his past memories, but others’ actions in connection with him are also part of his past actions.

It happened, Buddha became enlightened and one of his cousins, Devadatta, tried to poison him, tried to kill him, in many ways tried to murder him. He was always a failure, fortunately. Somebody asked Buddha, “Why don’t you do something about it? This man is constantly trying in many ways to kill you.”
Once he brought a mad elephant and left the elephant near Buddha. The elephant was mad, in a rage. The elephant came running, but suddenly just near Buddha it stopped, bowed down and closed its eyes as if it was meditating. So somebody asked, “Why don’t you do something about this man? And why is he doing such things?”
Buddha said, “Because of my past actions. I must have hurt him in the past. He is simply reacting out of that chain. It is not his doing, I must have done some wrong to him in the past. And I must have done something good to this elephant in the past, otherwise there was no possibility…. And I should remain now a witness. If I do something again in connection with Devadatta, then again a chain will be created. So let him be finished with my past deeds – but I am not going to create a new karma for the future.”
When someone insults you, the attitude of a witness, of a person who is practicing nonattachment, is this: “I must have insulted him before in some past life somewhere, because nothing is born without a cause. The cause must be there, this is only the effect. So I must wait and take it, accept it as part of my destiny and be finished with it, because if I do something again a new future is created and the chain continues.”
Someone insults you. If you answer in any way then the account is not closed, it remains open. If you don’t respond then the account is closed. And this is the difference between the Eastern attitude and Christianity. Even very beautiful things sometimes can be basically wrong. Jesus says, “If someone hits you on one cheek, give him the other.” This is a beautiful saying, and one of the most beautiful sayings ever uttered in the world. But ask an Eastern buddha. He will say, “Don’t do even that. When someone hits you, remain as you were before he hit you. Don’t change, don’t do anything, because even giving him the other cheek is a response – a good response, a beautiful response, but a response – and you are creating karma again.”
Nietzsche somewhere criticizes Jesus for this. He says, “If I hit Jesus on one cheek and he gives me the other, I will hit even harder on the other, because this man is insulting me, he is treating me like an insect. He is not giving me the same status as him.” Nietzsche says, “It would be better if Jesus hits me back, because then he is behaving with me on equal terms. If he gives me the other cheek he is trying to play the god and he is insulting me.”
That’s possible. You can insult a person just by becoming superior – not that Jesus means it, but you can do it. And just trying to become superior will be more insulting, and the other person will feel more hurt than if you had given him a good slap. The Eastern attitude is to not do anything in any way, to remain as if nothing has happened. Somebody hits you, you remain as if nothing has happened. And this hit has come not from this person but from your past deed. So accept it – it is your own doing, he has not done anything – and remain as if nothing has happened. Don’t hit him back and don’t give him the other cheek, because both will create a new chain. Be finished with it, so the account is closed with this man at least. And this way you close the accounts with all.
When all the accounts are closed you need not be reborn. This is the philosophy of going beyond life and death. Then you need not be reborn again; you simply disappear from this phenomenal world, from this bodily, physical world. Then you exist as cosmos, not as individuals. Jesus’ saying is beautiful, very moral. But Buddha’s attitude is spiritual, not only moral: not to do anything, because whatsoever you do creates future, and one has to stop creating future.
He knows that whatever faces him in this life is the result of the deeds of his past life. Whether in pleasure or in pain, he can do nothing.
If you think you can do something you can never become a witness; if you think you can do something you will remain a doer. This has to be very deeply realized – that nothing can be done. Only then can the witness arise.
Life has to be observed, and if you observe life you will come to feel that nothing can be done. Everything is happening. You are born – what have you done about it? It has not been any choice, you have not chosen to be born. You are black or white – you have not chosen to be black or white, it has happened. You are man or woman, intelligent or stupid – it has happened, you have not done anything about it. You will die, you will disappear from this body, you will be born in another. Look at all this as a happening, not as a doing on your part. If you feel that you are doing something you can never become a witness.
The modern mind finds it very difficult to become a witness, because the modern mind thinks he can do something, the modern mind thinks he has willpower, the modern mind thinks that it is in its hands to change things and destiny. The modern mind goes on insisting to children, “You are the master of your destiny.” This is foolish. You cannot do anything, and whenever you feel that you are doing something you are under a wrong impression.

It happened once, under a tree many stones were piled. A building was soon going to be constructed and those stones were piled there for that building, to fill in the foundations. One small boy was passing, and as small boys do, he took a stone and threw it in the sky. The stone was rising upwards…. It is very difficult for stones even to imagine that they can go upwards, they always go downwards. Just because of gravitation stones always go downwards, they cannot go up-wards. But every stone must be dreaming somehow or other to go upwards. In their dreams stones must be flying, because dreams are fulfillments of those things which we cannot do. They are substitutes.
So all those stones must have dreamed somewhere, sometime, about flying. And this stone must have dreamed that some day he would fly, he would be-come a bird – and suddenly it happened. He was thrown, but he thought, “I am rising.” He looked downwards. Other stones, his brothers and sisters, were lying down, so he said, “Look! What are you doing there? Can’t you fly? I have done a miracle! I am flying, and I am going to the sky to see moons and stars!”
The other stones felt very jealous, but they couldn’t do anything so they thought, “This stone must be unique, an avatar, a reincarnated superior being. We cannot fly. This stone must be a Krishna, a Buddha, a Christ. He has miraculous power; he is flying” – and this is the greatest miracle for a stone.
They felt jealous, they wept over their destiny, they were sad, but they couldn’t do anything. Then they started feeling – because this is how mind goes on consoling – “Okay, you are one of us. You belong to us, to this pile, to this nation, to this race. We are happy that one of our brothers is flying.”
But then the moment came when the momentum of that small boy’s throw was lost, the energy finished and the stone started falling back. For a moment he felt dizzy, for a moment he felt, “What is happening?” and he couldn’t control it. But suddenly, as everybody rationalizes, he rationalized, “It is enough for the first day. I have gone too far, and I must go back now to my home.” Then he thought, “I am feeling homesick. It is better now to go back, to rest a little. I am tired. I must go back to my brothers and sisters, to my community, and tell them what beautiful phenomena I have seen – the sky, infinite sky, and such vast space, stars, moons – so near. This has been a cosmic event, an historical event; it should be written for the generations to come, for them to remember that one of us had flown once into the sky, had become just like a bird. The dreams are fulfilled.”
He started falling back. When he came just near the pile he said, “I am coming back. Don’t look so sad. I will not leave you, I will never leave you. The world is beautiful, but nothing is like home.” And he fell down.

And this is the story of your whole life. You are thrown, existence throws you. Then for certain moments you enjoy – life, flying, beauty, love, youth – but this is happening. It is happening just like breath coming in and going out. You are not doing anything, everything is a happening. Once you understand this ego disappears, because ego exists only with the idea that you can do. To realize that nothing can be done is the highest point for the spiritual seeker to begin with, the climax of understanding. After that is transformation.
And if you cannot do anything, then when someone insults you, you can remain a witness – because what can be done? You can look at what is happening, you can be detached. A pain comes, a suffering happens – what can you do? You can be a witness. Pleasure comes, you are happy – what can you do? It has happened. It is happening just like night and day, morning and evening.
Watch your mind. There are moments of sadness, and immediately after them moments of pleasure, then again moments of sadness. When you are sad you are just on the brink of being happy, when you are happy you are just on the brink of being sad. This goes on revolving. And you have not done anything really, you are just like that stone. He takes a happening for a doing – that is fallacious. When you fall in love what have you done? Can you do anything to fall in love? Can you fall in love consciously? Try it and then you will see the impossibility; you cannot do anything. And if you have fallen in love, you cannot stop that falling.
There are foolishnesses which belong to youth and there are foolishnesses which belong to old age. This is the foolishness of the youth: he thinks, “I am doing something when I am in love.” So he thinks, “This is something of my doing.” It is a happening. And this is the foolishness of old age: old people go on saying, “Don’t fall in love. Stop yourself, control yourself” – as if love can be controlled. But the whole society exists around the ego – control, doing, not happening. If you can look at life as a happening, witnessing comes easily.
Whether in pleasure or in pain, he can do nothing. Indulgence is but a disease and affluence of all kinds a storehouse of adversity.
This is not condemnation, this is just giving you a hint that the opposite is hidden. When you are in pleasure, pain is there hidden, will come soon.
Indulgence is but a disease and affluence of all kinds a storehouse of adversity.
It is not a condemnation, this is simply the fact. But you go on forgetting. When you are happy you forget that you were ever sad before, you forget that sadness will follow again. When you are sad you forget that you were ever happy before, and you forget that happiness will follow again. You are in a moving circle, in a moving wheel. That’s why in the East life is called a wheel, just a wheel – moving. Every spoke will come up and every spoke will go down and will again come up. You may not be able to connect – that’s your misery. If you can connect you can see.
Go into loneliness for at least twenty-one days and then watch. There is nobody who can make you happy or unhappy, there is nobody who can make you angry, pleased, or anything. You are alone there. Have a diary and watch and note down every mood that comes to you. Then for the first time you will be-come aware that there is no need for anybody to make you angry – you become angry by yourself. There is no need for anybody to make you sad – there are moments when you suddenly feel sad. And there is no need for anybody to make you happy – there are sudden glimpses when you are happy.
And if you can watch for twenty-one days and go on noting down, you will see a wheel emerging. And this wheel is so subtle, that’s why you are not aware and you never connect it. If you watch deeply you can even say that one mood is passing and you can say what will follow, which spoke is going to come. If you have observed basically, deeply, you can predict your moods. Then you can say, “On Monday morning I will be angry.”
Much research is going on in Soviet Russia about moods, and they say a calendar can be made for every person. On Mondays he will be angry; on Saturdays, in the morning, he will be happy; on Tuesdays, in the evening, he will feel sexual. If you observe yourself you can also approximately fix a routine, a wheel of your life. And then many things become possible. Russian psychologists have suggested that if this can be done – and this can be done – then family life will become more easy, because you can look at your wife’s calendar and your wife can look at your calendar. Then there is no need to get angry about anything, this is how things are going to happen.
You know that on Tuesdays the wife is going to be terrible, so you accept it. You know from the very beginning that it is going to be on that day, so from the morning you can remain a witness, you need not get involved in it; it is your wife’s inner work. Two beings moving side by side need not get concerned with the other’s spokes. And when she is unhappy, sad, it is just foolish to get angry about it, because you create more sadness through it. The day when your wife is unhappy it is better to help her in every way, because she is ill. It is just like menses, a periodical thing.
Now in Czechoslovakia one research has proved that not only women have their menses, periods, but men also; every twenty-eight days they become depressed for three, four days. And it should be so, because man cannot be anything else than a wheel; if woman is a wheel man must be a wheel. And there are some secretions in the blood in man also: every twenty-eight days, after four weeks, they pass through a menstrual period, for four or five days they are sad.
With every menses every woman becomes depressed, violent, angry, and her intelligence goes low. It is now a proven fact that girls in menses should not go to sit for examinations because they unnecessarily lose much. Their IQ is low when they are in menses, and unnecessarily they lose much. They should not be forced to go to the examination when they are having a period, they cannot compete rightly. They are angry, disturbed, the whole system is a chaos inside. But there is no rule yet.
In the East it has been one of the traditions that whenever a woman is in her period she should not make any contact with anybody. She should move into a lonely room and remain closed and meditating for four days, because if she is out mixing with people she will create unnecessary bad karmas and they will create chains. She should not touch food, because she is in such a chaos that the food becomes poisonous.
Now scientifically also it is proved that when a woman is in menses, if she takes a flower in her hand the flower immediately becomes sad. Subtle vibrations, chaotic vibrations, affect it. A woman in menses should not be in contact with people, it is better if she simply meditates and rests. Such periods are with men also, but they are more subtle. The body secretes some hormones in the bloodstream.
This calendar can be maintained. You can observe your life for two or three months impartially, and then you can know that you are moving in a wheel and others are only excuses; you impose upon them. You get sad when you are alone also, but if you are with someone you think the other is making you sad. And man and woman are not different, cannot be. They are not two different species, they are one species, and everything has a positive-negative relationship.
Man ejaculates in intercourse; women don’t ejaculate, but a subtle ejaculation happens in the bloodstream, subtle hormones are released in the bloodstream, because women are passive. But as far as childbirth is concerned they are positive and man is passive. That’s why menses with woman is positive – ejaculation happens, blood comes out of the body. In man ejaculation happens but it moves into the bloodstream, hormones are released. Man is born out of man and woman, woman is born out of man and woman – in every individual both are there.

I remember, once Mulla Nasruddin’s wife said to him, “Nasruddin, I wonder…sometimes I get very puzzled. Sometimes you look so manly, so powerful and strong, and sometimes so effeminate, so feminine. What is the matter?”
So Nasruddin brooded, contemplated, and then he said, “It must be hereditary, because half of my parents were men and half were women.”

But everyone is bisexual; no one belongs to one sex, and cannot belong to one sex. Half of you is man and half of you is woman. So the difference is only of which part is visible. You may be man only because the male part is visible on the surface and the female part is hidden behind; you are a woman if the female part is visible on the surface and the male part is hidden behind.
That’s why if a woman gets ferocious she will be more ferocious than a man, because then she simply comes out of her surface, and what is hidden is the man. Ordinarily when a woman is angry she is not so angry as a man, not so aggressive as man, but if she is really angry then a man is nothing compared to her. A man can be more loving than a woman. He is not ordinarily so, but if he is then no woman can be compared with him, because then the hidden part comes out. And man has not used the hidden part; it is fresh, alive – more alive than woman. So if a man is really in love he is more loving than any woman, because then his hidden woman which is fresh, unused, comes out. And when a woman is angry, filled with hatred, no man can be compared, because the hidden, fresh aggression comes out.
And this happens in life: as people grow old, men become more effeminate and women become more manly. That’s why old women are very dangerous; the stories about mother-in-laws are not just inventions. They are dangerous, be-cause now the female part has been used so much that it has dissipated and the male part has come in. Sometimes women may grow mustaches when they are old. Their voice will become manly, it will not be so feminine, fine; it will become coarse, because one part has been used. And by the time menopause happens, when the menses have stopped, the female part is dropping, the surface is dropping and the inner part is working more and more. Old men become effeminate, their coarseness is lost.
So this is a rare phenomenon: if they have really lived silently, beautifully, then old men become more beautiful than old women. When young a woman is just wonderful, very beautiful; everything, every curve of her being is beautiful. Old women become coarse, the beauty is lost. Old men become more beautiful than they were when they were young. Look at Mahatma Gandhi’s pictures: when he was young he was ugly, the older he grew the more beautiful. Only when he was in the last stage of his life was he beautiful. This happens because man becomes more effeminate, more curves come into his being and corners become soft. This is not to condemn.
Every union leads inevitably to separation.
Every union leads to separation, every marriage is a preparation for divorce.
The ignorant suffer the maladies of mental anxiety.
The ignorant suffer because of ignorance – because they cannot see this polarity. If they can see that every union is going to become a separation they will neither be happy about the union nor unhappy about the separation. And if you are not happy about the marriage and not happy about the divorce you have transcended both. Then a relationship grows which cannot be called marriage and cannot be called divorce. That relationship can be eternal.
But marriage implies divorce, union implies separation, birth implies death. So be aware of the opposite, that will help you to become a witness. It will lessen your happiness, it will lessen your misery also. And a moment will come when happiness and misery will become the same. When they become the same you have transcended.
And this is the way they can become the same: when happiness comes, search for the hidden unhappiness somewhere in it. You will find it. When unhappiness comes, search for the happiness hiding somewhere – you will find it. And then you know that happiness and unhappiness are not two things but two aspects of the same coin. And don’t believe too much in the aspect that is visible, because the invisible will become visible, it is only a question of time.
All material things are perishable, because time is constantly devouring them. Through the understanding of scriptural precepts, one’s faith in material things is uprooted and one’s mind freed of them. This is called ordinary nonattachment.
This is through effort, understanding. With mind you can achieve this ordinary nonattachment. But this is not the goal, this is just the beginning.
When thoughts like: “I am not the doer, my past deeds are the doers, or God himself is the doer…”
Even such thoughts drop. These were the base of the first, these thoughts were the base of the ordinary nonattachment. When even they:
…cease to worry the seeker, a stage of silence, equilibrium and peace is attained. This is called sublime nonattachment.
…Because to constantly think, “I am not the doer,” shows that you believe you are the doer; otherwise why go on constantly saying “I am not the doer”?
Once it happened, one Hindu sannyasin, a traditional monk, stayed with me for a few days. Every day in the morning, in the brahmamuhurt, just before the sunrise, he would sit and repeat constantly, “I am not the body, I am the soul supreme. I am not the body….”
So I heard him doing it, saying that for many days, and then I said, “If you really know that you are not the body, why repeat it? If you really know you are the supreme self, then who are you convincing every morning? That shows you don’t know. You are just trying to convince yourself that you are not the body, but you know you are the body; that’s why the need to convince.”
Remember this: the mind works in this way. Whenever you try to convince yourself of something the contrary is the case. If a person tries too much to say, “I love you,” know well that something is wrong. If a person tries to say too much about anything, that shows that the contrary exists within; he is trying to convince himself, not you. Whenever a husband feels guilty that he has looked at another woman, or has been friendly, or was attracted, then he comes home and that day he will be more loving to the wife. He will bring ice cream or something. So whenever the husband brings ice cream beware – because now he is not trying to convince you, he is trying to convince himself that he loves his wife more than anybody else.
Whenever mind becomes aware that something has gone wrong, that wrong has to be put right. The first effort for nonattachment is such effort. You go on insisting to yourself, “I am not the body, I am not the doer,” but you know well that you are the doer, you are the body. But this will help. One day you will become aware of both these polarities: that you are insisting that you are not, and still you believe that you are the body. Then both drop, you simply remain silent, you don’t say anything. Neither do you say, “I am the doer,” nor do you say, “I am the witness.” You simply drop this whole nonsense. You allow things as they are. You don’t say anything, you don’t make any statement. Then silence, equilibrium, and peace are attained – when you don’t make any statement.
Somebody asked Buddha, “Are you the body or are you the soul?” Buddha remained silent. The man insisted, and Buddha said, “Don’t force me, because whatsoever statement I make will be wrong. If I say I am the body, it is wrong, because I am not. If I say I am not the body, that too shows that somehow I am attached to the body, otherwise why this denial? Why this botheration to say that I am not the body? So I will not make any statement. If you can understand, look at me, at what I am.”
When you simply are – without any statement, without any idea, without any theory, without any concept…when you simply are, when you have become a tree, a rock, you exist, that’s all. And you allow existence to flow from you, within you. You don’t create any resistance, you don’t say, “I am this,” because every statement will be a definition, and every statement will make you finite.
But this will not happen immediately and directly, remember. You cannot drop unless you have made the first effort. So first try, “I am the witness.” And bring it to such intensity that in that intensity you become aware that even this is futile. Then drop it and be yourself.

It happened once, Mulla Nasruddin went to England. His English was not very good, just like me – that is not much. He had a very beautiful dog, but very ferocious. So he put a plaque on the door, and instead of writing “Beware of the dog,” he wrote “Be aware of the dog.” That is wrong English – but wrongly he did a right thing, because the whole emphasis is changed. When you say “Beware of the dog,” emphasis is on the dog. When you say “Be aware of the dog,” the emphasis is on you. And this English word beware is beautiful. Make it two, be plus aware.

Be plus aware is the first step. In the second step, awareness also has disappeared. Simply be. Don’t be even aware, because that will create an effort. Simply be. When you are in that state of being – not doing anything, not even witnessing, because that too is a subtle doing….
A state of silence, equilibrium, and peace is attained.
This is called sublime nonattachment.