---
title: Walking in Zen Sitting in Zen 01
series: Walking in Zen Sitting in Zen 01-16
talk_number: 1
url: https://oshoworld.com/walking-in-zen-sitting-in-zen-01
language: English
duration: 01:32:23
author: ZEN AND ZEN MASTERS
scraped_at: 2026-01-03T09:37:51.223391+00:00
---
The first question:
Osho,
Why have you called this series of discourses: Walking in Zen, Sitting in Zen?
I am not to blame. The whole blame goes to this old guy Yoka. He is one of the rarest enlightened people; his sayings are tremendously beautiful. Very few sayings are available, but each saying is a diamond, unique in itself.
Reading his sayings, I came across this statement:
A man of Zen walks in Zen and sits in Zen. Whether he speaks or acts, whether he is silent or inactive, his body is always peaceful. He smiles, looking straight at the sword which takes his life. He keeps his balance even at the moment of death.
I love the statement: “A man of Zen walks in Zen and sits in Zen.” I love it for the simple reason that meditation cannot be just a part of your life. You cannot make a fragment of your life meditative. It is not possible to be meditative for one hour and non-meditative for twenty-three hours. It is absolutely impossible. If you are doing that, that means your meditation is false.
Meditation can either be a twenty-four-hour affair or it cannot be at all. It is like breathing: you cannot breathe for one hour and then put it aside for twenty-three hours, otherwise you will die. You have to go on breathing. Even while you are asleep you have to go on breathing. Even in a deep coma you have to go on breathing.
Meditation is the breath of your soul.
Just as breathing is the life of the body, meditation is the life of the soul. The people who are not aware of meditation are spiritually dead.
George Gurdjieff used to say that very few people have souls – and he is right. One is not born with a soul, but only with a seed which can grow into a soul – which may not grow. It will depend on you. You will have to create the right soil, the right climate for it to grow, to bloom. You will have to provoke the spring to come to you so that your soul can flower; otherwise you are just a bodymind. The soul is only an empty word. Meditation makes it a reality. Meditation is the climate in which the soul happens.
Zen is another name for meditation. The word zen comes from the Sanskrit root dhyana – it has traveled far. Dhyana means a state of absolute silence, of thoughtless silence, but full of awareness. Even the thought that “I am aware” is enough to distract you from your meditation. Even to know that “I am in meditation” is enough to destroy it.
A state of meditation is an innocent, silent state. You are blissfully unaware of your awareness. You are, but you are utterly relaxed. You are not in a state of sleep; you are fully alert, more alert than ever. Rather, you are alertness.
Dhyana is the greatest contribution of the East to the evolution of humanity.
Buddha never used Sanskrit himself. He used a language that was used by the masses of those days; he used Pali. In Pali, dhyana becomes jhan. When Buddha’s message reached China, jhan became chan. When it traveled from China to Japan, it became zen. But it originates from dhyana. Dhyana means meditation, but the English word meditation does not have that flavor. It has a long association with contemplation. The English word meditation means meditating upon something; there is an object of meditation.
In Zen there is no object at all, only pure subjectivity. You are aware, but not aware of something. There is nothing to be aware of; everything has disappeared. You are not even aware of nothingness because then nothingness becomes your object, nothingness becomes your thought. You are not aware of emptiness either. You are simply aware; there is no object to your awareness. The mirror is empty, reflecting nothing because there is nothing to reflect.
You have to remember this, otherwise meditation can give you a wrong impression. Whenever the word meditation is used, immediately the question arises, “On what?” That question is irrelevant. If you are asking, “On what?” you are asking what to think about; to contemplate about; to concentrate on something – and that is not meditation.
Concentration is not meditation. Concentration is an effort of the mind to focus itself. It has certain purposes of its own. It is a method in science – useful, but it is not meditation. Contemplation is a little vague, more abstract. In concentration, the object is more visible; in contemplation, the object is abstract. You concentrate on a flame of light; you contemplate on love. In Christianity, contemplation and meditation have become synonymous.
The word meditation should be given a new meaning, a new fragrance – the fragrance of Zen. Concentration is of the mind. Meditation is not of the mind at all. Contemplation is just in between, in a limbo. It is something of the mind and something of the no-mind, a mixture: a state where mind and no-mind meet, the boundary.
One has to reach the absolute state of awareness – that is Zen. You cannot do it every morning for a few minutes or for half an hour and then forget all about it. It has to become like your heartbeat. You have to sit in it, you have to walk in it. Yes, you even have to sleep in it.

One of Gautam Buddha’s chief disciples Ananda, asked Buddha: “One thing always puzzles me and I cannot contain my curiosity anymore, although my question is irrelevant. The question is that when you go to sleep you remain in the same posture the whole night. Wherever you put your hands, your feet and whatever side you lie down on, you remain exactly the same, like a statue. You don’t move, you don’t change your side, you don’t change your hands, your feet – nothing changes. You wake up in the morning in exactly the same posture as you had gone to sleep. One night, just out of curiosity, I watched you the whole night through – not a single movement. Are you controlling yourself even in your sleep?”
Buddha said, “There is no question of control. I am awake, I am in meditation. I sleep in meditation. Just as I wake up early in the morning in meditation, every night I go to sleep in meditation. My day is my meditation, my night too. I remain absolutely calm and quiet because deep down I am perfectly aware. The flame of meditation goes on burning smokeless. That’s why there is no need to move.”
Yoka says:
A man of Zen walks in Zen and sits in Zen.
This is of great significance for you all. Meditation has to become something so deep in you that wherever you go it remains, abides with you; whatever you do, it is always there. Only then can your life be transformed. And not only will you be meditative in your life, you will be meditative in your death too. You will die in deep meditation.
That’s how Buddha died. That’s how all the buddhas have always died. Their death is something exquisitely beautiful. Their life is beautiful, their death too. There is no gap between their life and death. Their death is a crescendo of their life, the ultimate peak, the absolute expression.
When Buddha died he was eighty-two years old. He asked his disciples to come together – just as he used to when he talked to them every morning. They all gathered together. Nobody was thinking at all about his death.
Buddha said: “This is my last sermon to you. Whatever I had to say to you I have said. Forty-two years I have been telling you, saying to you – I have poured my whole heart out. If anyone has any question left he can ask now because this is the last day of my life. Today I leave for the other shore. My boat has arrived.”
They were shocked! They had come just to listen to the daily discourse. They were not thinking that he was going to die – without making any fuss about death! It was just a simple phenomenon, a simple declaration: “My boat has come and I have to leave. If you have any question left you can ask me, because if you don’t ask me today, I will never again be available and the question will remain with you. So please, be kind and don’t be shy,” he told his disciples.
They started crying. Buddha said, “Stop all this nonsense! This is no time to cry and weep, and waste time. Ask if you have something to ask, otherwise let me go. The time has come. I cannot linger any longer.”
They said, “We have nothing to ask. You have given more than we would have ever asked. You have answered the questions that we have asked, that we could have asked. You have answered questions which will be fulfilling for all kinds of inquirers for centuries.”
Buddha said, “So I can take leave of you. Goodbye.”
And he closed his eyes, sat in a lotus posture and started moving toward the other shore.
It is said that at the first step he left his body; the second step, he left his mind; the third step, he left his heart; the fourth step, he left his soul. He disappeared into the universal so peacefully, so silently, so joyously. The birds were chirping; it was early morning and the sun was still on the horizon. Ten thousand sannyasins were sitting and watching Buddha dying with such grace. They completely forgot that this was death. It was such an extraordinary experience. There was nothing of death as they had always conceived it would be.
So much meditative energy was released that many became enlightened that very day, that very moment. Those who were just on the verge were pushed into the unknown. It is said that thousands became enlightened through Buddha’s beautiful death.
We don’t call it death, we call it mahaparinirvana, dissolving into the absolute – just like an ice cube melting, dissolving into the ocean. He lived in meditation, he died in meditation.
It is because of Yoka that I have chosen this title: Walking in Zen, Sitting in Zen. In this simple phrase, the whole experience of all the awakened ones is condensed.
Yoka also says:
The fearless thought of Zen is like the powerful roaring of a lion, striking terror into the hearts of all other animals. Even the king of the elephants runs off forgetting his dignity. Disciples of good heart, they alone, like the old dragon, hear that roaring with calm delight.
Yes, Zen is like the roar of a lion. All other religions speak in a way that does not hurt so much. They are compromising; they compromise with your sleep. Zen is noncompromising. It does not care about your sleep and your beautiful dreams. It shocks you, it shatters you. Its whole effort is to wake you, whatever the cost. Yes, it is like a lion’s roar.
Only disciples of good heart, they alone, like the old dragon, hear that roaring with calm delight.
It can be heard only with a deep love for truth. It can be heard only by those who are real inquirers, not just curious, not just spectators, not just philosophers, but those who are really ready to go through a radical transformation – who are ready to die and be reborn. It is only for those few people who have guts and courage because it is not like Christianity, a Sunday religion, that each Sunday you go to the church and your paradise is assured. It is not like Mohammedanism, that you pray five times and go on repeating the same words like a parrot. Words which are not your words, which are not spontaneous to you, which have been imposed on you by others – you may not even know their meaning.
It is such a stupid world! Mohammedans pray in Arabic, which they don’t understand; Hindus pray in Sanskrit, which they don’t understand; Buddhists now pray in Pali, which they don’t understand. And all for the simple reason that priests have been insistent in keeping the dead language because if the prayers are translated into your language which you understand, you would realize that they are very poor. You would be at a loss – you would not be able to see what there is to pray about in them; they would lose all the mystery. The mystery is there because you don’t understand them. Hence Latin, Greek, Arabic, Sanskrit, Pali, Prakrit – dead languages which nobody understands anymore. Priests go on insisting that prayers should be in the dead languages.
You are saying something which you don’t know the meaning of. What kind of prayer is this? To whom are you addressing it? You don’t know anything about God. And what you are saying is not arising out of your heart; you are just being a gramophone record – “His Master’s Voice.”
Zen is not interested in such compromises. It wants you to really wake up. It is hard work, a thankless job. A Zen master has chosen something for which nobody is going to thank him. Everybody will feel sabotaged by him and everybody will feel hurt by him. Everybody will feel, “He is disturbing my sleep.” Only very few people, who are real inquirers, who are ready to risk all, will be able to understand. Because Zen says that your whole life has to be transformed, not just a part of your life.
When you are in the temple, in the mosque, in the synagogue, you become religious. When you step outside again, you are irreligious, just the old self. Being in the temple is a pretension. It divides you, it creates a schizophrenic humanity, it creates people who have split minds. If you see them praying in the mosques, in the temples, you will say, “How beautiful they are!” And the same people in the marketplace become so ugly. The same people will kill each other with such cruelty, you could never have conceived of it. If you had seen them praying in the mosque, in the church, you would not have believed that they could butcher each other so cruelly, so mechanically.
Christians have killed thousands of Mohammedans, Mohammedans have killed thousands of Christians. Hindus have killed Mohammedans, Mohammedans have killed Hindus; Hindus have killed Buddhists, and so on and so forth. All these religions have been enemies of each other. They talk of love, but that is only mere talk; the reality is totally different. Why is it so? – because their prayer is false.
Zen wants you to be religious, not in a formal way, but to be really religious in your day-to-day life. Zen does not divide your life into the mundane and the sacred, it says that everything is sacred. So eating, be meditative; walking, be meditative. Whatever you are doing – taking a bath, be meditative. Wherever you are, you are in the temple. This whole existence is God’s temple. Behave as you would like to behave in a temple. God is present everywhere.
Zen does not talk about God at all, but only of godliness – a certain quality, a fragrance which is everywhere. Only when you have the capacity to learn will you be able to see it. All that is needed on your part is the capacity to be silent, receptive, welcoming, open.

The second question:
Osho,
It is claimed that we learn from chaos. How much more does man need to awaken?
Chaos is not there outside – the outside is a cosmos, but inside there is a chaos. It is because of the chaos inside that people don’t look inward. They are afraid to look, very frightened of looking in. They keep themselves occupied in every possible way so that there is no time left, no space left to look in. They go on listening to the buddhas, who say, “Know thyself.” They understand perfectly well what is meant by “knowing thyself,” but they don’t make any effort to know themselves. They are afraid of the chaos.
Inside there is chaos. Outside there is no chaos. The stars are moving in a rhythm, the whole existence is rhythmic; it is in absolute accord. Just man’s mind is in a chaos. And if you see any chaos outside, that is man-made, man-created.
Man remains a chaos unless he becomes a no-mind. The mind is a chaos – the mind is bound to be a chaos – and you have become identified with it. What is the mind? – past plus future. The present is not part of the mind at all, the present belongs to existence. And the present is an absolute harmony. The past is no more and the future is not yet. Your mind consists of these three nonexistential things: memories and imaginations, memories and desires, memories and hopes. It is because of this that you are living in a mad state.
Everybody is insane inside. We don’t call anybody insane unless he moves too much to the extreme, but the difference between insane people and the so-called sane is only of degrees – and anything can trigger it. You are just boiling somewhere near ninety-nine degrees and just one degree more – your business fails, you go bankrupt, your wife dies… That one degree is added to your ninety-nine degrees and you start evaporating; you are insane.
The psychiatrists, the psychotherapists, all function only to keep you within limits. They keep you normally abnormal – that is their function. They are agents of the society, just as in the old days, priests were the agents of the society. Psychotherapists are the new priests – a new priesthood which functions to keep this society running; which keeps this society believing that everything is okay.
Nothing is okay. Everybody is on the verge of a breakdown and anything, any accident, can push you into the world of the insane. You are getting ready, you are always getting ready. The more sensitive you are, the more alive you are; the more is the possibility that you may go insane.

At the funeral of his wife, Perelli made a terrible scene. In fact, it was so terrible and heartrending, that friends had to forcibly restrain him from jumping into the grave and being buried with his beloved Maria. Still overcome with grief, he was taken home in the rented limousine and immediately went into complete seclusion.
A week passed and nothing was heard of him. Finally, worried about the poor guy, his late wife’s brother went to the house. After ringing the doorbell for ten minutes – and still worried – the brother-in-law jimmied the front door, went upstairs and found his dead sister’s husband busily banging the maid. The bedroom was a mess – empty champagne bottles everywhere.
“This is terrible, Perelli!” the brother-in-law declared in shocked tones. “Your dead wife, my sister, has been dead only a week and you’re doing this! You’re doing this!”
So busy in the saddle was Perelli that he managed only to turn his head. “How do I know what I’m doing?” he said. “I got such grief! I got such grief!”

People are in a mess. They are just keeping face somehow, managing a facade, pretending that everything is okay. But nothing is okay.
You ask me: “It is claimed that we learn from chaos.” Yes, it is true. But we learn from chaos only if we go inward, if we enter the chaos consciously, deliberately, knowingly. If we encounter the chaos, of course, we learn – there is no other way of learning. It is really out of this chaos that stars are born. It is out of this chaos that buddhas are born – but you have to encounter it. We go on doing just the opposite; we go on hiding it, covering it. We don’t want to show it to anybody and we don’t want to see it ourselves. We are so frightened, we are so scared. We are afraid that we may not be able to manage. We are afraid that if we go in we may not be able to come back. So we cling to anything on the outside; any excuse is enough to cling. We go on clinging to something or other – we just go on avoiding ourselves.
The person that you are avoiding the most in your life is you. Your whole life is managed in such a way that you never come across yourself. You have been trained, brought up, educated, cultured, civilized in such a way that you will never meet yourself. You will meet everybody except yourself. You will be introduced to everybody except yourself, for the simple reason that society does not know how to cope with the inner chaos.
It is only in the presence of a master, in a buddhafield, that people gather courage to face themselves. In the beginning it is a breakdown. But if you are moving into it consciously, soon the breakdown becomes a breakthrough. To transform breakdowns into breakthroughs is the whole function of a master. The psychotherapist simply patches you up. He puts a few bandages on you, a little ointment here and a little ointment there. He helps you to stand on your own two feet again, back in the old way. He makes you your old self again. You start functioning, you start doing the old things that you have always been doing. That’s his function. He is not there to transform you. You need a metapsychology – the psychology of the buddhas.
It is the greatest adventure in life to go through a breakdown consciously. It is the greatest risk because there is no guarantee that the breakdown will become a breakthrough. It does become – but these things cannot be guaranteed. Your chaos is very ancient – for many, many lives you have been in chaos. It is thick and dense. It is almost a universe in itself. So when you enter it with your small capacity, of course, there is danger. But without facing this danger, nobody has ever become integrated, nobody has ever become an individual, indivisible.
The claim is absolutely right: we learn only from chaos. But we learn only if we go through the chaos. And we have to go through the chaos in a particular way, with a style, with a method. Just going into chaos without any method will be a breakdown – you will go mad.
Zen, or meditation, is the method which will help you to go through the chaos, through the dark night of the soul, balanced, disciplined, alert. The dawn is not far away, but before you can reach the dawn, the dark night has to be passed through. As the dawn comes closer, the night will become darker.
This is really the function of religious communes. Alone you may not be able to do it, but in a commune where many people are ahead of you, many people are behind you – and with a master who has attained to the dawn, who goes on calling you forth, who goes on saying to you, “Don’t be worried, the goal is not far away”… And there are people ahead of you who say, “Don’t be worried. We have passed through such a state and you will also pass through it. Just a little more perseverance, a little more awaiting, a little more patience!” And there is the master, like a shining star. He goes on helping you in every way, holding your hand in moments when you would like to run away, to escape and go back to your old world; to forget all about it because it is such a nightmare. Yes, one learns, but one learns the hard way; there is no shortcut.
You say: “How much more does man need to awaken?” It is not a question of how much more, it is not a question of quantity; either you are asleep or you are awake. No one is more asleep than anybody else. The people who are asleep are asleep in the same way. It does not matter how deeply you are asleep – it is not a question of quantity. You are asleep, that is enough. The same is the case with awakening. If you are awake, you are simply awake. Nobody is more awake or less awake.
For centuries theologians have been discussing… Theologians always discuss stupid things. In India they have been discussing for centuries: “Who is more awake, Mahavira or Buddha?” Jainas say that Mahavira is more awake, Buddha’s followers say that Buddha is more awake. The whole point is nonsensical, the whole argument is foolish. There is no question of more or less. If somebody is awake, he is awake. Buddha is awake, Mahavira is awake. The night is over; the chaos has been transformed into a cosmos.
This is the miracle: when you are perfectly awake, your very chaos becomes a cosmos because it starts settling into an orchestra; the noise becomes music. Suddenly, all that was insanity, madness, is transformed into buddhahood, into enlightenment – the same energy! Chaos means energy – energy of which you are unconscious. If you become conscious, the very phenomenon of consciousness is a transforming phenomenon. You need not do anything else, just being conscious of it is enough. The spring has come. Suddenly, buds start opening, flowers bloom – thousands of flowers. The inner world becomes full of fragrance.
Man is absolutely asleep.

The drunk Mulla Nasruddin noticed a parrot perched on top of a farmhouse gable. Attracted by the bright plumage, he ran to fetch a ladder. He climbed onto the roof and was about to clap his cap over the bird when the parrot fixed him with a beady eye and asked, “What the hell do you think you’re doing?”
“Gosh, I didn’t mean nothing!” said the Mulla, “I thought you was a bird!”

People are not in their senses. You think you are awake and that is one of the greatest mistakes – it keeps you unawake. The very idea that you are awake is a deception. If you think you are already awake, there is no need to do anything to be awakened.
You have to realize that you are drunk, drunk with many things: with greed, with lust, with anger, with ambition, with ego. These are all drugs. It is a very strange world: ordinary drugs are prohibited, which are not so harmful. People are continuously talking against smoking, which is not very harmful. It is a kind of pranyam: breathing in, breathing out. Of course, a little foolish because you can breathe pure air and you are breathing dirty smoke and paying for it. But it is nothing much to be worried about. Or people are against alcohol. Once in a while a little bit of alcohol is not bad, it is fun. And it is purely vegetarian. You are not harming anybody. But so much antagonism against alcohol, smoking!
The new drugs are far better than alcohol. For example, LSD is far better, less harmful than alcohol. Taken in right doses, with a right guide, in a right atmosphere, it can reveal many things to you. It can become a method of encountering yourself. It can give you new visions, new insights into your being and into existence itself. But people are against it, although they are not against greed; they are not against ego trips; they are not against ambition.
Just a few months ago Morarji Desai was the Prime Minister of India. He is very opposed to alcohol, obsessed by it. He wanted absolute prohibition. But he is not aware that he is more alcoholic than anybody else. He is such an egoist – very rare to find – and so full of greed and ambition. He has been trying to be in some post or other his whole life. Now he is eighty-five, but still, a few days ago he said, “If people want me again, I will stand in the elections.” It is a well-known fact that he was even willing to become Chief Minister of Gujarat. After being the Prime Minister of India, he was ready to be just a chief minister of one of the smallest states. Such power-hungry people!
But nobody thinks that ambition, greed, lust for power are intoxicants. They are keeping humanity in a chaos. These are the people – and they are not alone. We are all in the same boat. A few are madly after power, a few are not so madly after power, but everybody thinks in terms of power, money, prestige, respectability. These things go on keeping you drunk. And then a person can do anything.
Morarji Desai wants to live as long as he can. Maybe deep down he thinks that he can become physically immortal by drinking his own urine! He is against alcohol, but not against drinking his own urine. Now, alcohol is pure fruit juice – far better than drinking your own urine. But he does not call it urine, he calls it “water of life.”
Just the other day Indira moved into the Prime Minister’s house. For two, three months, she didn’t move there. Why? – for the simple reason that the whole house had to be cleaned because Morarji had lived there for two, three years. Every utensil had to be cleaned and changed. The bathroom tiles had to be removed and demolished. The whole house was stinking!
I have heard that when he went to America he was very puzzled. Wherever he went – he was invited to many parties – the ladies would always gather in the opposite corner of the room. He inquired about it, but nobody would give him an answer. Politely, people tried to change the subject, but he insisted. Finally somebody said, “Sir, if you insist, we will have to tell you. The ladies are afraid that if you suddenly feel thirsty, then…? So they keep themselves aloof, a little far away.”
These people have been dominating humanity – ambitious! Now he wants to live. For what? – just for power, to have more power; to have more power for longer.
Man is not destroyed by these small things – marijuana, LSD, etcetera – he is destroyed by something far deeper. Ambition is the most poisonous thing. We are unconscious.
Unless we become very aware of our inner poisons we will not be able to transform our being from darkness into light. We will remain dark holes – and we have the capacity to become eternal light.

Three Irishmen, none too sober, were talking together at a bus terminal. They got so engrossed comparing their bowling scores that they didn’t notice the bus had pulled in. As the driver sang out, “All aboard,” they looked up, startled and dashed from the platform.
Two of them managed to hop on the bus, but the third didn’t make it. As he stood sadly watching the bus depart in the distance, a stranger tried to cheer him up, saying, “You shouldn’t feel too bad. Two out of three made it and that’s a pretty good average.”
The Irishman shook his head. “But they came to see me off.”

It is not only so with the people who are drunk, it is not only so with the people who are politically drunk, it is so with your so-called religious people too. Those who think they are helping mankind – great missionaries, public servants – are the most mischievous people; for the simple reason that they themselves are in chaos and they are trying to help others. They double your chaos, they multiply your chaos. The world would be far happier and far saner if there were no missionaries, no public servants. If people are left to themselves they will come to their senses sooner. But there are public servants; they cannot leave you, they cannot leave you alone.

A man was beating an old woman on the street. A crowd gathered. The man was very strong, tall, muscular. Finally somebody in the crowd gathered courage and asked, “What’s the matter? Why are you beating that poor old woman?”
He said, “I want to help her to the other side of the road, but she insists on not going. I am here to help old people to cross the road. The traffic is dangerous.”

That’s what is happening: missionaries, public servants, are bent upon helping you!

Jake the barber, passing by a tenement house in the pre-dawn hours of the morning, saw a man leaning limply against the doorway.
“What’s the matter?” he asked sympathetically. “Drunk?”
“Yeah, I’m afraid sho.”
“Do you live in this house?”
“Yep.”
“Want me to help you upstairs?”
“Yeah, shank you.”
“What floor do you live on?”
“Shecon.”
With much difficulty, Jake half dragged, half carried the wilting figure up the dark stairway to the second floor.
“Is this your apartment?” he asked.
“Yep,” affirmed the man, his eyes already closed in alcoholic slumber.
Jake opened the unlocked door and shoved the drunk inside. He then groped his way back downstairs. But as he was going through the vestibule, he made out the dim outline of another man, apparently in worse condition than the first, staggering in front of the house, out of the night.
“What’s the trouble, mister?” he asked. “Are you drunk, too?”
“Yesh,” came the feeble reply.
“Do you live in this house also?”
“Yesh.”
“Don’t tell me you live on the second floor, too?”
“Yesh.”
Again Jake half carried the stranger to the second floor. He pushed open the same door and shoved the man inside the darkened room.
As Jake was emerging from the building he discerned yet a third man, evidently worse off than either of the other two. This poor fellow was disheveled and bleeding from cuts and bruises on his head and face. He was about to approach him and offer him assistance when the object of his solicitude darted into the street and threw himself into the arms of a policeman.
Offisher,” he gasped, pointing a quivering finger at Jake, “perteck me from this man. All night long he’s done nothin’ but drag me upstairs an’ throw me down the elevator shaft!”

It is not a question of how much more man needs to awaken; man simply needs to be awake. The only way to be awake is through meditation; there is no other way. Zen is the only way: Walking in Zen, Sitting in Zen.

The third question:
Osho,
After listening to you the other day and hearing you say that sex is stupid, we tried it right away. We don't understand! What do you find stupid?
I have been talking to you of other things. Have you ever tried them right away? I am telling you about meditation every day and you go on postponing it. And sex you tried right away! You did me a great favor – you did not try it here! That shows its stupidity.
Sex is not stupid, you are stupid. It is because of you that poor sex also becomes stupid. You will never know unless you rise a little higher. Unless you become a little more alert, you will not see the stupidity. You can’t see it remaining on the same level – nobody can see it.
Go to the madhouse, ask any madman, “Are you mad?” He will be mad at you! No madman will accept that he is mad. He will say, “What are you talking about? The whole world is mad except me. I am perfectly sane.” No madman accepts he is mad. If a madman accepts he is mad, that is a sure sign that he is coming out of his madness, he is becoming sane.
You will not be able to see the stupidity of it unless you learn a little more meditativeness, so that you can observe; so that you can remain detached; so that you can see from a vantage point; so that you can have a little perspective. Right now you don’t have any perspective; you are too close.
Just stand very close to the mirror, with your nose touching it and you will not be able to see your own face. It is not the fault of the mirror. You have to give it a little space, then the mirror can reflect you. You are too close.
Sex seems to be the greatest obsession. The priests have to be given all the credit for it. For centuries they have been condemning sex as sin and they have made it an obsession. I don’t call sex a sin, I simply call it stupid. I am not saying that you will suffer hell – how much more hell do you need to suffer? You are already suffering in it. And what does it go on giving you? It just keeps you engaged – engaged in the other so that you can avoid yourself. That is its basic stupidity: it keeps you ignorant because it keeps you ignoring yourself. The man is interested in the woman, the woman is interested in the man. Everybody is interested in the other. It seems as if the other has all that you need and the other is also thinking that you have all that he or she needs. Both are beggars – and believing that the other has the kingdom.
Sooner or later you feel frustrated, but your frustration never teaches you anything. It is very difficult to learn anything. If one woman has failed you, you start looking toward other women. If one man has not been up to your standards – and no man can be, no woman can be, because that is not possible, that is not in the nature of things – then you start looking to other men. All kinds of perversions are there, but if you ask any perverted person, he will not say that he sees any stupidity in it.

A Frenchman was making love to someone’s wife when the husband returned two days early from his business trip. Quick as a wink, the Frenchie scrambled out of the sack and took off like a big, big bird. However, the angry husband was just as fast on his feet and he grabbed a rifle and shot the Frenchman’s balls off. Not at all perturbed, the Frenchman stuck out his very long tongue and shouted, “Missed me!”

Now if you ask this Frenchman, he will say that he is not doing anything stupid; he is doing the most fantastic thing in the world!

Three woodcutters came down to the town after a long four-month work period, during which they had not seen or heard a thing except trees and their axes. Within hours they were totally drunk and decided to visit the local whorehouse.
The madam of the institution found herself in a fix, as she could only offer two girls and didn’t want to lose her third customer. So she told one of the girls to put the inflatable tailor’s dummy into one bed. While two of the woodcutters were escorted to the beds with the real girls, the one who was the most drunk was put to bed with the dummy.
When the three met the next morning, they exchanged the reports of their experiences. When the turn came for the one, who had been in bed with the air-filled rubber woman, to share his experience, he said, “First it was really nice, but she was too quiet. Then, when I bit her nipple, she gave one big fart and flew out the window.”

You will not be able to see what you are doing. Be a little more meditative and don’t be in such a hurry: “You told us and right away…” It seems it was just an excuse. You believed that you were experimenting, you believed that you were doing something in order to know. People can believe all kinds of things – but you cannot deceive me! People can go on rationalizing. You think you did it because I said sex is stupid? You would have done it anyway. Even if I had said that sex is very intelligent, you would have done it. If I had not said anything about sex, you would have done it.
Have a look at your mind. Try to understand how you go on rationalizing and deceiving yourself. You cannot understand what I am saying unless you rise a little higher from the state of consciousness where you are right now. If you want to see more you have to rise a little higher.
It is as if you are standing on the road; I am sitting on the treetop. I say to you, “A bullock cart is coming down the road.” You say, “I don’t see any bullock cart. There is no bullock cart.” But I can see. My perspective is bigger because I am on a higher place. You will only see the bullock cart when it comes very close to you and after a few yards it will disappear again. And I will say to you, “It has not disappeared. It is still there on the road.” You will say, “It is no longer there, it is gone.”
The higher you rise, the more you can see. When you reach the ultimate height, buddhahood, you can see everything. There is no past and no future; there is only present. In that clarity, sex is the most stupid thing because it keeps you in bondage the longest. I am not condemning it, I am simply stating a fact. It is your bondage. It keeps you unconscious and it does not allow you to see what you are doing. You are possessed by it.

Back in the early 1960’s when France was fighting its last colonial war, a draft-dodger from Paris pretended to have poor eyesight during his physical at the army induction center.
The army doctor didn’t buy that, so he sent for a gorgeous young nurse and told her to take off her clothes.
“Describe what you see, young man,” the doctor asked.
“All I see is a blur, doctor,” the slacker replied.
The military MD said, “Your eyes may not be as good as they should be my lad, but your prick is pointing straight toward Algeria!”

That’s why I call it stupid: it keeps you unconscious, it keeps you in a kind of possession. It is hormonal, it is chemical. It is not you; it is just your biology that goes on forcing you to do certain things. If you watch, you will be surprised: “What are you doing? And why are you doing it?” If you watch you will be surprised: “What are you gaining out of it? What have you gained up to now?” In your saner moments you know perfectly well what I am saying, you understand it. Those saner moments are very superficial – they come and go – and soon you are again back in the same trap.
Go back again, do it right away, but be watchful, be meditative. I will be there, standing by your side. Let us see what happens. Either you will not be able to do it at all or you will find that it is a biological compulsion, it is an obsession; it is not you. Your consciousness will remain floating upward and deep down in the valley it will happen, but you will remain detached, unconcerned, cool. And that will give you the insight.
Sex becomes a tantric experience when meditation is added.

The fourth question:
Osho,
Why do wives always close their eyes during love-making?
They can’t bear to see their husbands having a good time!

And the last question:
Osho,
I am sure my husband is deceiving me. Last night he came home with lipstick on his shirt, but when I asked him about it, he said it was tomato juice. What should I do?
Ask him, “Who is this tomato?”
Enough for today.

============================================================

The first question:
Osho,
What is Zen?
It is almost impossible to answer because Zen is not a philosophy, it is not a doctrine. It is an experience, an experience of your own interiority, of your own subjectivity – not an objective experience. If it were some object outside you, there would be a possibility of describing it, of analyzing it, of defining it. It is indefinable by its very nature; it is not within the grasp of intellect. It is an experience of dropping out of your mind: of disappearing from your mind into your being; of slipping out of the mind and entering into your being.
The mind is a false entity; your being is your real face, your original face. The mind is created by the society, hence there are different kinds of minds – the Hindu mind, the Christian mind, the Jewish mind – but the being is one. It is neither Christian, Hindu nor Mohammedan. Being is not even individual, it is universal. It is like a dewdrop slipping into the ocean. As a dewdrop, it disappears. As a dewdrop, nothing remains. It dies. On the other hand, it is reborn: it becomes the ocean. But there is nobody to say what has happened and there is no way to say it; no words are adequate enough.
I can tell you how it happens, but I cannot tell you what it is. I can indicate toward it – fingers pointing to the moon, but fingers are not the moon. There are millions of people who go on worshipping the fingers. The more attached you become to the fingers the less capable you will be of seeing the moon. The fingers have to be forgotten. Once you have understood the point, where to look – forget the fingers and look at the moon.
Zen is one of the purest spiritual experiences, uncontaminated by any thought, any theology, any speculation. It is nonargumentative, it simply is.
Listen to Yoka. Yoka says:
Dear friend, do you know the true man of Zen?
He has forgotten the intellectual understanding of what he has learned in order to reach profound understanding….

He lives in equanimity, calm and content. He is free from all care, and he acts naturally and reasonably. He does not struggle to avoid illusion nor does he seek for satori.

He knows that illusion is unfounded and that satori is none other than himself. He sees the real nature of not-knowing as the nature of the Buddha and he sees that the reality of his illusory body is equivalent to
the eternal body of the Buddha.

When he fully realizes the body of the Buddha, the body of the universal law, he has nothing. He becomes nothing. He himself is the source of all things and his ordinary life is another name for the eternal Buddha….
If you live in this understanding, you can change in a single moment. You can transform yourself absolutely, without wasting any time. Beautiful hints. First, you have to forget all that you have learned. All your learning is a barrier. Put it aside. Zen cannot be learned and cannot be taught. You can imbibe it, you can imbibe the spirit of it.
Living with a master, you can drink – you can drink the invisible nectar, you can be full with it – but you will have to fulfill one condition: you have to put the mind aside.
Gayan has written to me. She says that while listening to me she feels like dancing. That’s how the disciple is bound to feel; something inside you starts dancing, singing. Something inside you rejoices. Something inside you immediately falls in tune with the master; a deep synchronicity happens. It cannot be taught, it cannot be learned, but it can be transferred. That transfer is beyond words and beyond scriptures. It needs a totally new art: the art of surrender, the art of total let-go.
The first condition: forget all that you have learned. The second condition: be calm, quiet, contented. Desire keeps you away from the present moment, far away. Zen is the taste of reality here and now. It is the feel of the here and now. Zen is not concerned with any God after death. Zen is concerned with the godliness that surrounds you right now.
These sounds, these birds, these trees, these people, this silence – three thousand people disappearing into a silence, losing their identities, egos – and suddenly Zen is there! It becomes almost tangible. You can touch it, you can eat it, you can drink it. But there is no way to convey it through words. You have to be calm, quiet and contented so that you can be in the present. You have to be free of all care. Care simply means that you are not trusting existence; you are trying to be careful on your own. You are afraid. You are not yet aware that existence cares for you, that it mothers you, that it fathers you. Once you start feeling the mothering and the fathering that surrounds you, in the air, the sun, the moon, the stars, you drop caring for yourself. There is no need to be worried. You start flowing with existence. You drop pushing the river. And you are then able to understand what Zen is. You have to live naturally and reasonably.
Remember, society has made you absolutely artificial. It has given you ideas, it has imposed certain moralities, characters upon you. It has destroyed your spontaneity. You have to regain it, you have to reclaim it. That is the most essential thing to be done.
Once you have claimed your naturalness, Zen starts welling up within you. Zen is your nature, your very nature. When you are spontaneous and responsible, responding to reality moment to moment without any ready-made formulas and reflecting reality like a mirror – you are living the life of Zen. And that is the reasonable life – not rational, remember, but reasonable.
A reasonable man is not rational. They are not equivalent, they are not synonymous. The rational man is never reasonable, the rational man tries to deny all that is irrational. Life consists of both the rational and the irrational. The reasonable man accepts both. He accepts the paradox of life. He accepts the rational, he accepts the irrational and he sees no inconsistency in them. Hence he remains undivided; nothing can divide him. No division exists in his being and he sees no division anywhere. Life and death are one to him; summer and winter are one to him; men and women are one to him. He knows that divisions are superficial; deep down everything is one. He knows the oneness of life, hence he is not disturbed by any contradictions.
The man of Zen contains all contradictions. He is vast enough, he can contain contradictions. He enjoys paradoxes and does not make life a problem. He looks at life as a mystery. He is not interested in solving it, he is interested only in living it – living it to the uttermost. He knows that illusion is unfounded.
Hence he is not worried like the Hindu monks, escaping from the world because the world is illusory. Do you see the stupidity of it? If the world is illusory, why are you escaping from it? For what? If it is not, if it is not really there, why are you escaping?
If you see a man running and you ask him, “Where are you going?” and he says, “There is a rope which only appears to be a snake – it is not a snake – and I am running away from that appearance of a snake,” you will say, “You are stupid! If you know it is a rope, stop running. If you know it is not a rope, stop saying that it is illusory, that it is only an appearance.”
But that’s what the Hindu monks have been doing for thousands of years: calling the world maya, illusory and yet renouncing it. Renounce your wife because she is illusory; renounce your children because they are illusory; renounce your day-to-day, ordinary life because it is illusory. Escape to the Himalayas – everything is illusory. But why are you escaping? From what?
That is the beauty of Zen. Zen says:
He knows that illusion is unfounded and that satori is none other than himself.
He knows that all is illusory so there is no need to escape. It is unfounded, you need not be worried about it. It is a rope that appears to be a snake. So why escape? Why renounce? Let it appear to be a snake, let it be there as a rope. Whatsoever it is, the appearance is unfounded, hence there is no need to renounce.
Zen does not teach renunciation. It teaches understanding, awareness, alertness, and the capacity to see things as they are. There is no need to escape from anywhere. Wherever you are, Zen helps you to relax.
There is no need to search for God, to search for satori, samadhi, enlightenment. The very search is a barrier. We search for things only if they are not within our being. If they are within our being, there is no need to seek and search. Just relax! In that very relaxation you have found them. Satori is our nature. Samadhi is our nature. Godliness is our nature. Hence, the man of Zen goes nowhere; he simply rests in himself.
He sees the real nature of not-knowing as the nature of the Buddha…
To function from the state of not-knowing is to function in the present. If you function from the state of knowing you are functioning out of the past. All knowing is from the past. Knowledge means the past: your experiences, your memories. If you function through them you are not responding to reality. The only way to respond to reality is to be utterly innocent.
When you function from the state of not-knowing, your response is total and always adequate. It always brings fulfillment, it is liberating. Hence Yoka says it is: …the nature of the Buddha. When you realize this totally, you are nothing. Not that you become an enlightened soul, no; you disappear. The ego is no longer found. There is nobody to become enlightened – that is enlightenment. According to Zen: “When there is nobody to be enlightened, enlightenment has happened.” When you are just a pure nothing, a silence so profound, so unfathomable that there is no way to measure it; so virgin, so pure, that nobody has ever walked into it –even you cannot enter into it. Only when you disappear, is it there.
This nothingness is the ultimate truth. Buddha calls it shunya, the void. If you can live in this nothingness, your ordinary life is another name for the sacred life. That is one of the greatest messages of Zen. It does not destroy your ordinary life, it enriches it. All other religions have been destructive, they have been poisoners, they have been condemnors. They have been condemning your ordinary life and praising some ideal life which exists nowhere. They condemn that which is and they praise that which is not.
Zen says: “This is all. There is no other life, there is no other existence. This ordinary existence is beautiful. There is no need for any other world; this world is more than enough.” Zen is the greatest alchemy. It transforms your ordinary, mundane life into a sacred, holy life.

A Zen master, Rinzai, was asked, “What did you used to do before your enlightenment?”
He said, “I used to do the same as I am doing now. I used to carry water from the well for my master and I used to chop wood for him and the commune. I continue to do the same: I carry water from the well and I chop wood for my disciples.”
The man said, “But, what is the difference between an enlightened man and an unenlightened man?”
Rinzai said, “The difference is the unenlightened man thinks that this is an ordinary life – chopping wood, carrying water from the well. And the enlightened man knows this is holy, sacred, divine.”

The last thing to be remembered is that Zen does not believe in a gradual process. It says: “Because buddha is your nature, because enlightenment is your very nature, you can get it right now. There is no need to wait even for a single moment.” Zen believes in sudden enlightenment, hence Yoka says: “It can happen in a moment.”
All other religions are postponements. Hindus say: “You will have to be born many, many times; only then can you become enlightened.” Why? – because first you have to undo all the bad karmas that you have done in your past lives. Now, you have lived for millions of lives. How long is it going to take to undo all those karmas? And while you are undoing those karmas you will be doing other karmas, so once again you will be accumulating bad karma. That means it is impossible to become enlightened or next to impossible.
Zen says: “Whatever you have done has been done in a dream. Wake up and it is finished.” It is not that when you wake up you have to undo what you have done in your dream; just by waking up all dreams are finished. Knowing that they were dreams is to end them. You have lived your sleepy life for many lives and whatever you have done has been done in your sleep. It is nothing very important. It is of the same stuff as dreams are made of.
Just wake up!

The second question:
Osho,
Why do all the awakened ones say that man is asleep? I don't agree. I think I am fully awake. What do you say?
It is impossible to understand what the awakened ones say unless you are also awakened. They speak your language – they have to speak your language out of sheer necessity because there is no other language – but their meaning is totally different.
When the buddhas say that you are asleep, they don’t mean ordinary sleep. Of course, you are not ordinarily asleep, you are awake. You go to the marketplace, to the office and you do your things. Of course, in the night you sleep. But buddhas say that you are asleep twenty-four hours of the day. Certainly, they are not using the word sleep in the same sense that you are acquainted with it; they mean something else, something totally different. They are talking about a metaphysical sleep. They are talking about an inner state of unconsciousness.
You walk, you talk, you do a thousand and one things, but like a zombie. You live mechanically. You don’t live in awareness. When you listen to the awakened ones, you are listening again through all the barriers that you have created in your sleep, through all the layers of your sleep. You go on misinterpreting them. Of course, you are right – you are awake. In that sense, all the buddhas are wrong. They know it too. But when they say that you are asleep they mean something more fundamental, not the ordinary sleep, not the ordinary awakening.
When they say to you, “Wake up!” They mean, be totally conscious so that nothing unconscious and dark remains in your being; so that no nook or corner of your being remains dark and unconscious. Right now only a very small part – one-tenth – is conscious; very fragile. Nine-tenths of your being is unconscious. You are just like an iceberg: just a little fragment of it shows on the surface – one-tenth, exactly one-tenth – and nine-tenths is underneath the water.
When you listen to the awakened ones, you will have to learn to understand their language, not according to you, but according to them.

As the Prime Minister was waiting to board the special plane that was taking him to the capitals of Europe, the Home Secretary, who had come along to see him off, whispered, “What is your advice on the Homosexual Bill?”
“Oh yes… Hmm,” said the Prime Minister. “Tell him we’ll pay him off when I get back!”

You listen according to yourself. You don’t listen silently. You don’t listen, having put your mind aside.

“Have you ever had an X-ray before this?” the doctor asked the sexy Italian girl.
“No, doc,” she said, “but I have been ultra-violated a couple of times.”

Your mind is constantly distorting and giving its own color to everything that it hears. Your mind is making you stupid, although you think your mind is making you intelligent.
Listening to the buddhas needs a certain space, a different kind of space. You have to listen very silently, you have to listen without any thoughts. You have to listen without any prejudice, you have not to decide for or against. You are not to be in a hurry – whether they are right or wrong. Just listen without being for or against. Don’t be in a hurry, otherwise you will do something stupid.

The Polish rapist is standing in the line-up of criminals at the police station. Bright lights blaze in his face and there are sleazy characters on either side of him.
The police bring in the rape victim and he jumps forward and shouts, “That’s her!”

Keep your stupid mind silent. Tell the mind, “Please be quiet.” It is okay in the ordinary world, but not with the buddhas, not with the awakened ones.
Whenever new disciples came to Gautam the Buddha he would say to them, “Just sit silently by my side for two years, then something will be possible. I can then say something to you and you will be able to understand.”

Once a great philosopher, Maulingaputta, came to see him. He had thousands of disciples of his own. He was a well-known philosopher, very respected, a great scholar. When Buddha said to him, “Be here and be silent for two years, then there will be a possibility of something transpiring between me and you,” of course he was offended.
He said, “Do you think that I am an ignorant person who cannot understand you? You can say whatever you want to say right now. There is no need for me to wait for two years. I understand the Vedas, the Upanishads, the Gita – why not you?”
Buddha said, “If you have understood the Vedas, the Upanishads, the Gita, why have you come here? For what reason? Your questions are answered. If you have understood the Upanishads, what is left? Don’t waste my time. You know already. So, get lost!”
He must have felt very shocked. He had come with five hundred disciples; they were also shocked. But he must have been a man of great guts – he understood the point. He said, “That’s right. If I had understood – really understood – there would have been no need to come to you. I have come to you because my questions have not yet been answered. I know all the Vedas and the Upanishads, but they have not transformed my being.”
Buddha replied, “Follow what I am saying. Ask no questions for two years. Unlearn everything. For two years keep quiet and be silent and sit here.”
While this was happening, Sariputta, one of Buddha’s greatest disciples, who was sitting there, started laughing.
Maulingaputta said, “Why is this man laughing? Is he crazy or something?”
Buddha said, “Ask him.”
Sariputta was asked and he said, “I am laughing because this man is really very cunning” – he was talking about Buddha – “I came here just like you and he told me to be quiet and silent for two years. During those two years all my questions disappeared. Now I have nothing to ask. And he goes on asking me, ‘Sariputta, why don’t you ask now?’ So my suggestion to you is that if you want to ask, ask now. If you don’t want to ask, then listen to him and be silent for two years.”
This happened. After exactly after two years, Buddha asked Maulingaputta, “Where are your questions?”
He laughed, bowed down, touched his feet, and said, “They have disappeared in silence. Just watching you, just seeing you, slowly, slowly my clarity became more and more transparent. The mind disappeared and I could see you with a no-mind. A totally different kind of relating has happened. Something has transpired. There are no questions, no answers either, but I am utterly contented. I have arrived home.”

A man says to his friend, “When you get to New York, call up my college chum, Jimmy Sexover. He is now working at the XYZ Company.”
When the out-of-towner reached New York he phoned the XYZ Company and asked the receptionist, “Have you a Sexover there?”
“Sex hour? Hell!” she replied. “We don’t even have a coffee break!”

You ask: “Why do all the awakened ones say that man is asleep?” Because man is asleep. It is a simple fact. Watch yourself and you will find the truth in it.
You say: “I don’t agree.” You can’t agree. You will have to disappear for the agreement to happen. If you persist, agreement is not possible. Both things are not possible: you and the agreement. Either the agreement is possible, then you will not be there, or you are possible, then agreement will not be there.
You also say: “I think I am fully awake.” If you are awake there is no need to think that you are awake. When you love a woman you don’t say, “I think I love you.” If you say that she will slap your face! If you love her, you love her. What is the point of saying, “I think”? When you are thirsty you don’t say, “I think I am thirsty.” If you are thirsty you are thirsty. You simply say, “I am thirsty.”
You say: “I think I am fully awake.” You are fully asleep! Maybe you are dreaming in your sleep that you are awake, that is possible. That’s what thinking is all about: dreaming, dreaming with open eyes.
Listen to the buddhas. Be more silent, quiet, calm. In your silence you will disappear, then the agreement, the harmony. It is not a question of agreeing philosophically. It is a question of being harmonious with the awakened one, falling in tune with his being. That’s what real agreement is.
If you go on thinking like this you will miss me totally. Here, thinking is not required; non-thinking awareness is required. It is hard to put thinking aside because we are so accustomed to thinking, and we think it is very clever to think about everything. There are things you cannot think about; either you know or you don’t know. The things I am talking about belong to that category: either you know or you don’t.
If you are fully awake, what are you doing here? Such a nice guy, what are you doing here? If you are fully awake, go and help other people to be fully awake. But you are not awake. I know you, I know your sleep – it is deep. You need a real hammering on your head. Unless your skull is broken you will not awaken, you will not be able to wake up.
Ordinary alarms won’t do. I am creating extraordinary alarms here. So I go on sending you from one therapy group to another. That means being pulled and pushed, beaten, shaken and shocked. We don’t leave any opportunity for you to remain asleep. Only when a little bit of awakening happens to you, will you understand what is happening here; what is transpiring here between me and the mad people who have gathered here.

The third question:
Osho,
Can affirmations be helpful for deconditioning the mind?
Deconditioning is possible only through negations, never through affirmations. Affirmation is the way of conditioning the mind. You have to negate: neti-neti. The Upanishads say: “Neither this nor that.” You have to go on negating till nothing is left to negate. When there is absolute emptiness, and no content is left to be negated, that is the state of a deconditioned mind.
A deconditioned mind is not a mind at all, it is a no-mind. How can you achieve a no-mind through affirmations? Affirmations mean that you are repeating something constantly, creating an atmosphere of autohypnosis. That’s how people have been doing it for thousands of years. Go on telling the child again and again and again, “God is. He created the world.” The whole of society goes on repeating it in the home, in the school, in the church – everywhere you go on repeating it – and the child becomes conditioned. He starts thinking he knows that God is. He is simply a gramophone record. It has become imprinted on his mind that God is. If he had been born in Soviet Russia the situation would have been just the opposite because there they go on repeating, “There is no God.”
One of my friends visited Soviet Russia. He was a teacher and he was very interested in the Soviet system of education, so he visited schools, colleges, universities – many schools. He told me that even small children laugh at the idea of God.
On his first visit he went to a small school and asked the younger children, “Do you believe in God?” They all laughed and said, “Do you?” He replied, “Yes, I believe in God.” And they said, “In the past, primitive people used to believe in God; ignorant people used to believe in God. Now nobody does.” These children are conditioned that there is no God.
Just because of the word no, don’t think that it is a negation – it is an affirmation. Affirmation can be of belief, and can also be of disbelief. Real negation means helping people to get rid of all kinds of beliefs and disbeliefs; helping them to get rid of all the conditionings that society enforces upon them.

Adolf Hitler writes in his autobiography: “There is only a very small difference between truth and untruth. Truth is untruth repeated many times, that’s all.”
He is right in many ways. Repeat any untruth, just go on repeating it and sooner or later people will start believing it. People have believed in all kinds of things for the simple reason that the people who were in authority were believers, they believed in these things. If they believed in God, the masses believed in God. People look up to the authorities: the priests, politicians and the rich people; the scholars and the professors. If they are all believers, there must be a God. If they believe that there is no God, the masses start following them. The masses are simply imitators. The society – every society – creates a certain atmosphere of conditioning. There exists no society in the world yet which does not live through this process of conditioning.
The whole process of conditioning is harmful, poisonous because it destroys the freedom of the individual. It destroys his capacity to inquire into truth; it destroys his adventure into life; it destroys his initiative to explore what is. Even before he asks a question, the answer is imprinted upon him. The people who go on doing this have vested interests. The priests would like you to believe in God. The communists would like you not to believe in God. There is nobody who is interested in you; they are all interested in their vested interests.
So affirmations cannot be helpful. All affirmations are conditionings. You need total negativity. That’s what Zen is: it negates. It says that there is no God; it says there is no soul; it says there is no paradise; it says there is nothing. It leaves you nothing to believe in. Even if you start believing in nothing, the Zen master is going to hit you hard.
It happened…

A disciple of Bokuju would bring his new experiences again and again – that he had experienced energy rising in his spine… And he would be beaten. Bokuju said, “Get out of here! Don’t bring such nonsense to me! You are not it. You are the watcher who watched the energy rising. So don’t get identified with it, otherwise it is once again a new identification, a new ego: the birth of a new ego, a spiritual ego, which is far more dangerous than ordinary egos.”
One day the disciple came and said, “You are right. Now I am seeing great light. I am full of light, all is light!”
He was beaten again, and was told, “You are not light either, you are the watcher. Who is seeing the light? You are the seer.”
It went on again and again in this way for years. After ten years he came to Bokuju really happy, fell at the feet of the master and said, “Now you will be happy with me – and no need to beat me. I have experienced nothingness!”
This time the master was so angry! He physically threw him out of the window – of a two-story house. He fell on a rock and the master looked from the window and said, “How are you feeling now?”
The hit was so hard that it really brought the disciple to his senses. He started laughing; lying down there on the rock he started laughing. The master also jumped from the window, embraced the disciple and said to him, “Now I am happy, really happy!”
The other disciples asked, “What has transpired? It is so mysterious!”
Bokuju said: “To say ‘I have experienced nothingness’ is wrong because you have made an object of nothingness. Nothingness has become your affirmation again – a thought, a content. You have to get rid of nothingness too! When he laughed, I could see nothingness in his laughter. There was nobody who was laughing, there was simply laughter – no claim, no claimer, just simple laughter, pure laughter. There was nobody who was laughing.”

That very moment the master felt connected to the disciple for the first time. Otherwise, all those experiences were creating barriers. Affirmations can’t help. All affirmations are conditionings.

“Cats, my dear,” said the spinster, “I hate the very sight of them. I had a sweet little canary and some cat got that. I had a perfect parrot and some cat got that. I had an adorable fiancée, and – oh, don’t mention cats to me!”

This is how things become conditionings. Now the very word cat has become associated with many, many bad experiences. The word cat has nothing to do with those experiences.
It is said of Napoleon that he was defeated because of cats. The enemy general brought seventy cats and placed them in front of the army because he had found out that the moment Napoleon saw cats he went crazy. He would lose all balance, he would lose all intelligence and become very nervous. That was true because apparently when Napoleon was only a six-month-old child, a wild cat had jumped on his chest. Since then, although he could fight with lions, don’t mention cats! That had become a very deep conditioned reflex.
Behaviorists all over the world are trying to manipulate this process of conditioning to create a robot-like humanity. Skinner says, “We can change the whole of humanity within a few years.” There is no need for a Buddha, a Jesus or a Mohammed to change humanity – and they have not changed it. For centuries they have been teaching, and nothing has happened; humanity has remained the same. We can change humanity very easily. All that is needed are methods of conditioning people.
If you want somebody not to steal again, there is no need to put him in prison for ten years. That is not going to help. In fact, that will condition him to be a bigger thief than he ever was before because he will be living with thieves. He will be living with greater experts than himself and all that he is going to learn is why he got caught in the first place. Next time he is not going to commit the same mistake.
That’s why once a person goes to jail he becomes a regular. He returns again and again. The jail becomes his home – he becomes a jailbird. He goes outside only to practice his art and he comes back again to do the homework. He does the homework in jail.
Skinner says that there is no need to waste time, just give him electric shocks and within two to three weeks he will be conditioned. He will never think of stealing. Even the idea of stealing will be enough, and he will start trembling and fall to his knees. Just the very idea will be enough to make him so nervous… He will remember all those electric shocks.
He proposes that every vice can be dropped from humanity just by giving electric shocks or with methods like it. And all virtues can be established by giving rewards, by giving beautiful rewards. For example, they have found that in your head there are different centers for different experiences. There is a pleasure center. When you are making love, the pleasure that you derive from it has nothing to do with your genital organs, it happens in your head. The genital organs simply trigger a process. In fact, the pleasure happens in your head, in your brain.
Now, Skinner says that there is no need to go into such a long process of courtship, talking nonsense to a woman or to a man. And then getting caught and married and having a thousand and one troubles. He says that simple things are possible. You just have to keep a small box in your pocket which will be connected to the pleasure center in your head – without any wires; it will be a wireless connection. So don’t be worried if people see wires coming out of your head and going into your pocket. Everybody will know what you are carrying in your pocket! Just a small box in your pocket and you can push the button. Suddenly you have a great orgasm and you are all smiles.
Skinner says that if you reward people for their virtue, for their good deeds, by manipulating their pleasure center, they will keep doing those things. For example, if whenever you go into a church suddenly you have great orgasms, naturally you will go more often. In fact, you will not leave the church at all! You will have to be forced to go out and do something else.
When Skinner was working on a rat, he connected the rat’s pleasure center with a small box and taught the rat to push the button. You will be surprised what the rat did. The rat pushed the button six thousand times. He went on pushing it right up until he fell down dead. He forgot everything else. He forgot all about food, he forgot to drink, he forgot everything else. He just went on and on pushing – six thousand times. The poor rat could not bear that much joy! Died, but died in ecstasy!
This can be done to man. This is going to be done because the idea is simple, very simple; the process is simple. Governments are bound to use it because it is easy to condition people to do and not to do certain things. Everyone will then be a saint and nobody will be a sinner. But saints or sinners – they will all be robots. They will not have any choice of their own.
Ultimately it could be that there is no need to have your own small boxes. In every country’s capital – in New Delhi, in Washington, in London – the prime minister or the president could hold the key. And every once in a while he could push the button and the whole country goes into an orgasmic joy. Then everybody will be obedient. Nobody will break any commandments, nobody will go against them. The whole country could be punished just by pushing a button because just as there is a pleasure center in the brain there is also a pain center. Just push the pain center and you could be in such agony, in such hell. But this is not going to bring freedom to humanity. This will be the destruction of all freedom and all possibility of freedom. It has to be stopped.
Affirmations, whether repeated in the old, primitive way or done by a more scientific, technological methodology, are the same. Man needs to be totally free of all conditionings. And that is possible only through absolute negation, where only pure consciousness is left and everything else is negated. Just the watcher is left and nothing to watch; the seer is left and nothing to see; the experiencer is left and nothing to experience.
That’s what we in the East have called “the witness.” That is transcendence – transcendence of all bondage; transcendence from the body, the mind and all the limitations that they impose upon you. Nirvana is possible, absolute freedom is possible, but only via the negativa.

The fourth question:
Osho,
What is compassion?
We know what passion is, hence it is not very difficult to understand what compassion may be. Passion means a state of biological fever – it is hot. You are almost possessed by biological, unconscious energies. You are no longer your own master, you are just a slave.
Compassion means you have transcended biology, you have transcended physiology. You are no longer a slave, you have become a master. Now you function consciously. You are not driven, pulled and pushed by unconscious forces; you can decide what you want to do with your energies. You are totally free. The same energy that becomes passion is transformed into compassion.
Passion is lust, compassion is love.
Passion is desire, compassion is desirelessness. Passion is greed, compassion is sharing. Passion wants to use the other as a means; compassion respects the other as an end unto himself or herself. Passion keeps you tethered to the earth, to the mud, and you never become a lotus. Compassion makes you a lotus. You start rising above the muddy world of desires, greed, anger. Compassion is a transformation of your energies.
Ordinarily you are scattered, fragmentary. Some energy is being absorbed by your anger; some energy is being absorbed by your greed; some energy is being absorbed by your lust, and so on and so forth. There are so many desires surrounding you that you are left without any energy. You are left hollow, empty.
Remember what William Blake said. There is great insight in it. He said, “Energy is delight.” You don’t have any energy left; all your energy keeps on going down the drain. When all these energies are no longer being wasted, they start filling your inner lake, your inner being. You become full. A great delight arises in you. And when you start overflowing, you have become a buddha and you have come upon an inexhaustible source.
Compassion is a key word, but you will understand it only if you go deep into meditation. Meditation is the key to transform passion into compassion. You will have to become more conscious. Right now you are unconscious – notwithstanding what you think, you are unconscious.

A girl taking a job in an office is asked by her intended employer how much she hopes to earn.
“Twenty dollars a week,” she answers.
“Twenty dollars?” he says. “I’ll give you that with pleasure.”
“With pleasure, that will be thirty dollars,” she replies.

Watch what you do, what you say, what you think, and you will be surprised – without taking any alcoholic beverages, without taking any drugs, you are in a state, a mess.

Mrs. O’Brien was berating her husband for his drunken behavior at the party the previous night.
“For sure, you were making an ass of yourself,” she asserted, “cavorting around like that!”
“I was not cavorting or nothing!” O’Brien defended himself. “I was walking as straight a line as any man there… Till all those people started stepping on my fingers!”

Just look at what you have been doing to yourself, to your life. What have you made of yourself? What have you gained? What meaning have you attained? What significance have you experienced? People don’t ask such embarrassing questions because the questions make them feel very depressed. But these questions have to be asked. Unless you ask these questions you are not going to change.

An Irish immigrant walked up to a vending machine, put in a coin and pressed the button labeled: “Coffee, double cream, sugar.” No cup appeared. Then two nozzles went into action, one sending forth coffee, the other, cream. After the proper amounts had gone down the drain where the cup should have been, the machine turned off.
“Now, that’s real automation!” the Irishman exclaimed. “This thing even drinks it for you.”

Man goes on living like a robot, functioning well, efficiently. In fact, the more like a robot you are, the better you function, the better society feels about you – because it is a society of robots. To be awakened, alert, conscious is dangerous. It is a society of blind people; to have eyes is to invite danger.
But without creating consciousness you will never know the beauty, the blessing that existence has bestowed upon you. You will never know the great opportunity that has been given to you to grow, to become. You can be sunlit peaks and you are just dark holes!

“Shit!” said Polaris. “I got a real jolt in court this morning. The judge fined me five hundred dollars for attempting to rape some broad I met on the subway. And then when he took a good look at her he fined me an extra ten dollars for being drunk!”

If you become alert to at least one thing – that you are not alert – that’s a great beginning.

A big Irishman said to a homely woman on the subway, “My God, you’re looking lovely tonight.”
“Oh, thank you, sir.”
“But don’t mind what I say, I’m drunk.”

Even if you are aware of that much – that you are drunk – you are not absolutely drunk.
Socrates says, “If you know that you don’t know, that is a great beginning. It is then possible for you to know.” To be aware that “I am ignorant” creates the possibility of seeking, searching in your own interiority for the truth – for your truth.
Compassion is the ultimate transformation of passion. You are in passion, but you go on thinking that you are right as you are. You go on defending yourself. You go against anything that disturbs your comfortable, mechanical life.
A visitor has written to me: “Your medicine seems to be too bitter. Osho, are you sure that you are a physician and not a horse doctor?” When I look at all the monkeys and the donkeys and the Yankees surrounding me, I wonder myself! I must be a horse doctor. The medicine is bitter and it is difficult to push it down your throat.
I have heard…

Mulla Nasruddin went to the horse doctor and said “My horse has become so lazy that something has to be done. He does not run. Not to mention running – he does not even walk! So give me something really vital.”
The doctor said, “We have the medicine, but it is very bitter and the horse may not take it, so you will have to use a certain device. Take this bamboo pipe, it is hollow inside. Fill it with the medicine – it is a powder.” He gave Mulla the powder. “Put one end of the pipe into the horse’s mouth and the other in your own mouth and blow so that it will go down the horse’s throat.”
Everything went well up to the last moment – the horse blew first! Nasruddin, an eighty-year-old man, jumped the fence of his garden and ran so fast that no Olympic runner would have been able to compete with him.
His wife rushed to the horse doctor. She said, “Give me a double dose immediately because I have to catch him. He has escaped!”

Looking at you, I can only say that I must be a horse doctor. But I take every care so that you cannot blow before I blow!
The first thing to be understood is that the medicine is bitter because you don’t know anything. It is bitter to accept. The second thing to be understood is that you are a machine. It is very bitter to accept. And the third thing to be understood is that you are just living in mud, crawling into dark holes, while you are meant to be flying into the sky toward the sun. It is hard to accept. You want lullabies, you want me to sing beautiful songs to you so that you can fall asleep, so that you can dream better dreams.
When you come to me you don’t come to be awakened, you come to me so that you can dream beautiful, sweet dreams. That is your purpose for coming; that is not my purpose in being here. Once you are here, you are caught. Slowly, slowly I start taking your dreams away. Slowly, slowly I go on destroying your illusions. Once your illusions are dropped, your dreams shattered, a great awakening is waiting for you – a great awakening which makes you a buddha.
When you are a buddha, only then will you experience what compassion is. It is cool love – not cold, mind you – cool love. It is a sharing of your joy with the whole of existence. You become a blessing to yourself and a blessing to the whole of existence. That’s compassion. Passion is ugly, compassion is beautiful. Passion is a curse, compassion is a blessing.

The last question:
Osho,
I wrote twenty questions and tore them all up. I realized that all I wanted was to say, “Hello, Osho. I am still here.” And to hear you say my name in lecture.
Hello, Deva Mohan. How do you do?
Enough for today.

============================================================

The first question:
Osho,
You say: “Go beyond the mind. Do not listen to its chatter. Discipline it and make it a servant. Do not be its slave.” But how to know when the mind is being disciplined and when it is being repressed? Also, when I took sannyas the other night you said not to get hooked on you. I have to tell you that you are closing the stable door after this particular horse has already bolted.
Prem Lisa, the difference is so great that it is impossible to miss it. Repression happens through fighting with your mind. Discipline happens through being watchful, aware, alert. In discipline, there is no fight implied. In discipline, there is no condemnation, no evaluation. One simply looks at the mind silently, seeing the whole traffic, without saying what is right and what is wrong; what should be and what should not be. Just as standing by the side of the road, you watch people walking by – saints and sinners, beautiful people, ugly people, good people, bad people – but you are unconcerned. It has nothing to do with you; you are out of it.
That’s exactly the meaning of the English word ecstasy. Ecstasy means to be out of the mind. You are just looking, as one looks at the clouds moving in the sky or at the river flowing by – cool, detached. You are neither trying to cling to something nor are you trying to push something away from you.
This is pure awareness; you are only a mirror. And in just being a mirror, the miracle happens – the miracle of discipline. Slowly, slowly the traffic starts disappearing. Fewer and fewer thoughts are moving on the road; fewer and fewer pictures are appearing on the screen; fewer and fewer memories, fantasies. Gaps start appearing.

A mother was saying to her child, “Be very careful when you go to school because the traffic is dangerous in the rush hour.”
The child replied, “Don’t worry. I always wait at the side of the road. And when a gap comes, then I cross.”

“When a gap comes…” As you are looking at your mind you will be surprised that gaps come, intervals come, when there is nothing to be seen. The observer remains alone and because it is alone, it is no longer an observer either. You can’t call it an observer because there is nothing to observe. The mirror is there, but it is not reflecting anything. There is no duality of the seen and the seer. In these intervals discipline arises.
The word discipline is also beautiful. It is sometimes very significant to go to the roots of words. Discipline comes from a root which means learning. When you are looking at a gap, learning happens. Learning about what? Learning about yourself, because there is nothing else. You are full of awareness. You are just full of your own being, overflowing. This experience of just being yourself, overflowing, undistracted by anything, undisturbed by anything, is the greatest learning; the greatest possibility of knowing the truth. This is discipline.
From the same root comes the word disciple. Disciple means one who is becoming capable of being utterly silent in the presence of the master. The disciple is one who allows the interval to happen when he is with the master. With the master you are bridged only through silence; when there is nothing in your mind you are bridged. Something then transpires between the master and the disciple. A flame jumps from the master into the heart of the disciple. The unlit candle of the disciple suddenly becomes lit. All is joy and light and love; a great dance arises.
Lisa, discipline can never be misunderstood as repression. Repressions are totally different. In repression you have already decided what is wrong – a priori decisions. In fact, others have decided for you what is wrong and what is right. Now you are simply trying to impose the ideas and opinions of others upon yourself. You will have to repress your nature. You will have to force that which is wrong – or which you have been told is wrong – deep into the unconscious. There will be a fight, great turmoil. Instead of bringing silence to you, every method of repression brings more turmoil.
That’s why the so-called religious people are more restless, more worried. You are worried only about this world, they are even worried about the other. You are worried only about this life, they are worried about many, many past lives and future lives. Your worries are nothing compared to the worries of the so-called religious people. They are sitting on a volcano because whatever is repressed is there and is not destroyed. Repression never destroys anything; you are simply sitting on top of it. The danger is that you cannot sit on top of it for twenty-four hours a day; you have limitations. You will get tired, you will need some rest. And whenever you are tired and need rest, repressions will start arising in you.
Hence, even your greatest saints go on thinking, fantasizing, dreaming about all the things that they have repressed. Mahatma Gandhi has written in his autobiography: “I have been able to control my sexuality as far as my day is concerned, but in the night, in my dreams, it comes with a vengeance.” This, he was writing at the age of seventy… A whole life of repression!
Yes, in the day you can somehow manage, but in the night, in your dreams, that which you have repressed in the day is bound to take revenge. It will come back, it will explode in you.
Hence, down the ages your saints have been very afraid of sleep. They go on cutting it down – five, four, three, two hours. The less they sleep, more is the danger because all their repressions have to come in those two hours, and in a very condensed way. They are crowding in from everywhere. And people worship them! The less a saint sleeps, the more people worship him. They say, “Look how much he has sacrificed! What a great austerity he is doing – he is not even sleeping! Or he sleeps for only two hours or one hour.”
The reality is that he is afraid of sleep. And where is the fear coming from? The fear is coming from the fact that when you are awake you can control, but when you are asleep, who is there to control? The controller is asleep, in a relaxed state. He cannot sit on top of all the repressions, and they will assert…
So, Lisa, if you are fighting with anything, it is not discipline. I don’t teach how to fight. I teach awareness. It is useless to fight with darkness, utterly useless and stupid. Bring the light in. Why fight with darkness? How can you ever hope to win by fighting with darkness? Bring the light in and darkness is no longer found.
You are surrounded by many darknesses: greed, anger, jealousy, lust, ambition, ego. They are layers of darkness. If you start fighting with all the layers of darkness, you are not going to win because there is no way to fight directly with darkness. Darkness does not exist in the first place; it is only the absence of light. So if you want to do something with darkness, don’t try to do it directly. Do something with light. If you want darkness, put the light out. If you don’t want darkness, put the light on. But do something with the light, forget about the darkness.
If light is there, darkness is not there. If light is not there, you cannot avoid darkness. You can close your eyes, you can try to forget about it; you can become occupied somewhere else, you can take your mind far, far away from it, but it is there all the same. It will show in your acts, in your thoughts, in your behavior. It will come up again and again. You cannot hide it – it is impossible to hide it. The truth of your being, whatever it is, is bound to surface.
Lisa, become aware. I am not saying what is wrong and what is right. I am simply saying, be aware. Or, awareness is right and unawareness is wrong. When you are aware, things start changing of their own accord and the mind functions as a servant. It is a machine, a beautiful machine. For thousands of years, it has been one of the most complex machines invented by nature. Man has not yet been able to create anything comparable to it. Even the best computer is not yet so capable as the mind.
A single human mind can contain all the libraries of the world. It is almost infinite. Its capacity is great, its use is great, but it should be your servant, not your master. As a servant it is beautiful; as a master it is dangerous.
Let consciousness be your master and the mind your servant. It happens through awareness. I am not telling you to control it because all control is repression. I am not telling you to fight because all fight is a sheer waste of energy. You are fighting with your own servant – you are wasting your energy. You need not fight with your servant, you have simply to say, “I am the master”; that’s all. You have simply to be the master, that’s all, and the servant bows down. The servant immediately understands that the master has come in. How does the master come in? The moment you become awake, the master comes in.
You ask me, Lisa: “You say: go beyond the mind. Do not listen to its chatter. Discipline it and make it a servant. Do not be its slave. But how to know when the mind is being disciplined and when it is being repressed?”
It is very simple. Nobody can ever misunderstand the difference between the two, nobody can ever confuse the two. They are so different – just like light and darkness; just like love and hate; just like flowers and thorns; just like poison and nectar. They are so totally different. But if you think about them you may get confused. In thinking you cannot make the distinction. Don’t think about them – experiment, experience and the distinction will be absolutely clear.
You also say: “Osho… When I took sannyas the other night you said, ‘Not to get hooked on you.’ I have to tell you that you are closing the stable door after this particular horse has already bolted.”
Lisa, I am not only a horse doctor but a horse lover too. When I see a good horse, I immediately fall in love. I believe in love at first sight; because it saves time. The moment I saw you, Lisa, the moment I saw tears of joy, love, trust and surrender in your eyes, I accepted you deep down as part of the orange Mafia!
I say, “Don’t get hooked on me,” only when I know that you are absolutely hooked and there is no way to escape. I don’t say it to everybody. I say it only to those who are already in. They may not be aware of it and may become aware of it later on.
I have seen it. You are hooked, you are stoned on me. Now there is no going back. Now this is going to be your whole world. I am your home. I say it only when I am absolutely certain, categorically certain, that there is no possibility of your going away; when I see that you are melting and merging. Only then do I say this, just to be generous: “Don’t get hooked on me.” I can afford to say it when I know that Lisa is finished!

The second question:
Osho,
What is the essence of Buddha Dharma – the religion of the Buddha?
Yoka says,
If you reach the Zen of Buddha, at that very moment you accomplish everything. In your dream there are many pathways. But when you wake up, they are reduced to nothing. Neither error, nor happiness, nor loss, nor gain. Do not try to find anything in the essence of your being. It is a long time since you wiped the dust from your mirror. Now it is time for you to see its brilliancy perfectly.

Who can not think, all is his…. If you practice charity in order to become Buddha. When will you succeed? Never – a thousand times never….

Drink and eat according to your true nature. All things in the universe are impermanent and therefore all existence is void. That is the whole understanding of Buddha.
This is the essence of Buddha Dharma, the religion of the Buddha. First: it is not a philosophy that you can understand intellectually. You have to become a buddha to know it. Hence, Yoka says:
If you reach the Zen of Buddha – the state of the Buddha – at that very moment you accomplish everything.
Nothing is missing when you reach the ultimate state of awakening; all is fulfilled, you are utterly contented. For the first time, life is known as a great significance, as a great dance, a celebration. Life is known for the first time as absolutely perfect. There is no complaint, no desire, no hankering for things to be other than they are. One is simply contented, totally contented. All desiring disappears.
What is the state of buddha? What is this “Zen of Buddha” Yoka is talking about? – it is the state of no-mind. Hence, Yoka says:
Who can not think, all is his…
The greatest thing in life to experience, is a state of no-thought. The greatest art of life, is to be able to be without mind. Even if it happens for a single moment – just a glimpse – you have reached into the beyond and you have crossed the point of no return.
Don’t go on thinking about what it is. By thinking you will go on missing it. Thinking is the sure way of missing the Buddha Dharma; non-thinking is the way to achieve it. It is your own nature.
Buddha does not talk about great mysteries, hidden secrets, esoteric knowledge. He does not believe in mythology; he is not an occultist. He is a very simple man, very ordinary. He believes in ordinary existence. He says that your day-to-day life is all there is. If you can live it joyfully, silently, understandingly, watchfully, there is nothing else to be done. Your very ordinary life starts becoming extraordinary.
Drink and eat, Yoka says, according to your true nature.
Just remember not to distort your nature, remain true to your nature. Listen to your own nature and follow it. Don’t follow anybody else.
Buddha says: “Even if you meet me on the way, kill me immediately.” He is saying: “Don’t follow me, just take the hints. Try to understand, imbibe the spirit. Feel my presence and go on your way. Live according to your own light, howsoever small it is, but if it is yours and you live according to it, it will go on growing.”
Buddha says: “Be a light unto yourself.” That is his greatest message. Nobody else in the whole world, in the whole history of humanity, has been so respectful toward others as Gautam the Buddha. “Be a light unto yourself.”
Buddhas only point the way – fingers pointing to the moon. You have to follow, and you have to follow according to your nature. You have to be silent, quiet, so you can listen to the still small voice within you, and then follow it. Wherever it leads it is good. Go in deep trust, following your own voice. Be spontaneous, natural, ordinary. This is the way of being extraordinary. Be ordinary but aware, and the ordinary becomes the sacred.
All things in the universe are impermanent…
So don’t be worried. All things are impermanent: pleasure and pain, friendship and enmity, poverty and richness, success and failure, birth and death. All is in a flux, all is impermanent, so why be worried? Everything goes on changing. Don’t cling – clinging brings misery, clinging shows your misunderstanding. The moment you cling to something you are living with the idea that it can be permanent. Nothing can be permanent and nothing can be done about it. It is just the nature of things to be impermanent.
You are trying to catch hold of rainbows. They are beautiful, but you cannot catch hold of them. One moment they are there, another moment they are gone. So don’t cling to anything because everything is impermanent. And don’t desire anything because even if you get it, you will lose it. If you don’t get it, you will be frustrated. If you get it and lose it, you will be frustrated. Either way you will be in misery; you are inviting misery. So don’t desire anything and don’t cling to anything.
Whatever comes, accept it. Buddha calls it tathata, suchness. Just accept it; live through it silently, without being disturbed by it. Misery comes, it will go. Happiness comes, it will go. Everything passes away, nothing abides, so there is nothing to worry about.
Go on passing through all kinds of experiences and you will know that one can pass through the world uncontaminated, uncorrupted. One can live in the palaces without clinging, then one is a sannyasin. One can live in a hut and cling to it, then one is not a sannyasin.
That’s why I don’t tell you to renounce the world, I simply say: “Be watchful.” That is the essence of Buddha’s message.
People ask me, “But Buddha renounced the world. Why did he renounce it?” He renounced it when he was not a buddha. He renounced it when he was as ignorant as anybody else. He renounced it in ignorance.
When he attained the truth, when he experienced the truth and came back home, his wife asked him only one question: “Just tell me one thing. Whatever you have attained… I can see you are a transformed being. You have become luminous, you are no longer the same person. The old is gone, you are reborn. It is so clear to me – even a blind person like me can see it. But just answer me one question. Whatever you have attained, was it not possible to attain it living here with me in this palace?”
And the story is that Buddha remained silent, looking downward. She was right. He didn’t say anything.
In the East, not saying anything is thought to be a sign of agreement. Mounam sammati lakshanam: to be silent means I agree with you. It says more than Buddha saying yes. His silence says more, it is more pregnant with meaning.
He felt it immediately: “She is right.” Whatever he had attained could have been attained anywhere. There was no need to go into the jungle.
There is no need for you to go anywhere. Wherever you are, you can assert your buddhahood, you can become awakened.
The essence is to slip out of the mind, get out of the mind. The mind is the world. The mind is full of desires, full of clingings, attachments, longings. Get out of the mind! Create a little distance between you and the mind. Be a watcher, a watcher on the hills and you will be surprised. As you watch the mind, the distance becomes bigger and bigger. As you watch the mind, as you become more and more established in watching, the mind recedes farther and farther away. One day it happens and you cannot hear the chatter of the mind; it is no longer there. It is simply, absolutely silent. In that silence, truth descends in you. In that silence, you encounter yourself, you encounter your innermost core. And that is the innermost core of the whole existence. Your being is the being of all.
We are separate as minds, as bodies, but not as consciousness. In consciousness we meet, we are one. That consciousness is godliness. That meeting, that oneness where all differences dissolve; where we are no longer separate ice cubes; where we have melted and disappeared into the universal, Buddha calls nirvana. The word is beautiful; it means cessation of the ego. When the ego ceases you are godliness, you are a buddha, you are a christ. It is the ego that is giving you a limitation. It is the ego that is making you live in a prison. Get out of the ego! Nobody is preventing you – it is your own clinging, it is your own attachment. You have become too attached to your chains, you have become too attached to your prison cell. You think it is your home, it is not. Come out of it. Wake up.
To be awake is to be a buddha. Yoka is right. He says: If you reach the Zen of Buddha – the state of Buddha – at that very moment you accomplish everything.

The third question:
Osho,
When you speak of religions, you usually mention Christians, Mohammedans and Hindus, but not Jews. Is there a reason for it?
Veet Ateet, there is a reason: I am the only Jew in India!

Once, I was taken for a ride in a Cadillac. The owner wanted to sell it and I was interested. I have used all kinds of cars except the Cadillac. It was a beautiful car, specially made. I loved it.
He said to me, “What do you say? How did you feel in it?”
I said, “I felt just like a Jew! I will not purchase this car – this will show my identity. I am already in more trouble than a man can manage. Now to declare myself a Jew will be inviting even more trouble. Jews are experts at inviting trouble!”

An old Jew was praying to God for years and never asking for anything. God became fed up. If you ask for something, it can be done and he can get rid of you! But he was not asking for anything. He was just praying and praying and praying.
So one day God said, “Listen! What do you want? Why don’t you say exactly what you want? I am ready to fulfill it.”
The old Jew said, “Is it true that we are your chosen people?”
God said, “Yes, that’s true.”
The Jew said, “Now please choose somebody else. For three thousand years, just because of you, we have suffered so much. Enough is enough! Now choose somebody else!”

Veet Ateet, you must be also a Jew, otherwise why this question? Jews are always thinking, in every possible way, about Jews.

The Friends of the Elephant Society – a society created to help sick, old or homeless elephants – decided that although most people knew what an elephant was, there had never been any serious, definitive study conducted about the huge animal. They therefore decided to hold a competition with a prize of a thousand dollars to be given for the best book on the subject of the elephant.
An Englishman entered his book entitled: The History and Statistics of the Elephant.
A German entered a three-volume set entitled: The Anatomy and Physiology of the Elephant.
A Frenchman entered a slim, hundred-page volume entitled: The Amorous Affairs of the Elephant.
An Italian seriously considers the project for about five minutes, drops it and joins his friends for some spaghetti.
And a Jew entered an epic effort entitled: The Elephant and the Jewish Problem.

Now, Ateet, why does this question come to your mind? I don’t say much about Judaism because in India there are no Jews. There are Hindus, Christians, Mohammedans, Jainas, Buddhists; only the Jews are missing, so I don’t mention them much. Of course, Jews are not missing here. This must be the only place in the whole of India where you can find thousands of Jews – but they are no longer Jews.
Ateet, this must be a hangover with you. Do you know what your name means? Veet Ateet means going beyond the past. You still seem to have a hangover of being Jewish. And having thousands of Jews here, it is better not to talk about them because they are very argumentative people.

A Christian visiting the Holy Land struck up a conversation with an Israeli.
“I am really surprised that you and the Arabs can’t get together peacefully.”
“My dear man,” said the Israeli, “the Jews are a very argumentative people. The only thing you can get two Jews to agree upon is what a third Jew should give to charity.”

That is true.

Jimmy finally got Sadat and Begin together for a resumption of the Middle East peace talks.
Afterward Sadat said, “I’m glad we buried the hatchet. In the future I wish you everything you wish me.”
Begin answered, “See, you’re starting up again.”

That’s why, Ateet, I don’t mention Jews very much. It is dangerous! Surrounded by thousands of Jews it is better not to mention Jews at all. And, moreover, Judaism is a dead religion, just as Hinduism is. In fact, there have been only two source religions in the world: Hinduism and Judaism. Both are dead. Jainism and Buddhism are offshoots of Hinduism, but because the root is dead the branches are dead too. Christianity and Islam are branches of Judaism and because the root is dead the branches are dead too. These are dead phenomena. I am not concerned much with the past.
Yes, something beautiful has also happened in Judaism and that is Hasidism. I have talked about it a lot. Just as I love Zen people in the tradition of the Buddha, I love Hasids in the tradition of Moses and I love Sufis in the tradition of Mohammed. These three are still alive in some small way because these three have never become established religions. They have always been anti-establishment; they have always been alternatives to the established religion; they have always been rebellious.
Hasidism is worth talking about, not Judaism – and I have talked about Hasidism. I have been approaching Hasidism with my own experience. I have been bringing Hasidism up to date, trying to make it part of the twentieth century. Hasidism is the essence of Judaism, the very fragrance of it.
I have something of the Hasids in me, that’s why I sometimes call myself a Jew. The Hasids love life, they are life-affirmative. They don’t believe in renunciation, they believe in rejoicing. They believe in dancing, singing, celebrating – and that’s exactly my approach too.
My religion is something of a meeting of Zen, Sufism and Hasidism – and something more thrown in.

The fourth question:
Osho,
Actually, I love to philosophize. What to do with that ability in a place like this?
Deva Anurati, philosophy is a sheer waste of your energy. The same energy can become your meditation, the same energy can become your awakening. Philosophy is like dreaming: you can dream beautiful dreams, but dreaming is dreaming. You can think of God, but to think of God is not to know God. To know about God is not to know God. The word about means around. You can go on around and around… You will be moving in a circle and you will never reach the target because the target is the center not the circumference.
Philosophy is circumferential, peripheral. It can deceive. It has deceived millions of people because it talks about love, about God, it even talks about meditation. It philosophizes about everything.
Philosophy means that your mind remains your master; it is mind that philosophizes. You have to go beyond mind, Anurati – and it is not going to happen through philosophy. It can happen only through meditation.
Now, you must be philosophizing about meditation: what it is, how to define it. There are thousands of definitions and you can be lost in the jungle of definitions.
I can understand your difficulty. You must be feeling a little out of place because here philosophy is debarred. I am creating a nonphilosophical atmosphere. The whole effort here is to help you go beyond the mind. I don’t want you to think about love, I want you to love. I don’t want you to think about existence, I want you to know existence, to be existence.
What is the point of thinking about water when you are thirsty? Even if you discover by your thinking that water consists of H2O, that is not going to quench your thirst. And that’s what philosophy is: H2O. You are thirsty and philosophy says, “Don’t be thirsty. Water is simply H2O. Just write H2O on the paper and eat the paper!”
Philosophers go on eating the paper. They eat great things: Upanishads, Vedas, Korans, Bibles. They have a great appetite for paper. That’s why there is such a shortage of paper in the world; there are so many paper-eaters. Crazy people!
Yes, once in a while philosophy may be good, just for a change.

Molly Landau was learning to drive a car. Regrettably, as it turned out, she thought she already knew how. So she dismissed her driving instructor and ventured forth upon the public highway, unaccompanied by either an experienced hand or a driver’s license.
As she wobbled in an uncertain course along Southern Boulevard in the Bronx, a milkman driving a well-behaved horse turned a corner. Mrs. Landau tried simultaneously to do several things: apply the brakes, avoid a collision, turn out, turn in, veer left, veer right, speed up, slow down, and who knows what else.
The “what else” was that she banged squarely into the side of the milk float, leaving it turned on its side in the middle of the street, with the horse and driver entangled in the wreckage.
The lady, at the same time as losing her head, lost control of the car. She sped away, swerved out of sight and circled the block on squealing tires. A minute later she reappeared at the scene of the accident, still wrestling with the steering wheel. The dairyman, who had managed to extricate himself from the mess, was cutting his struggling horse loose from the twisted harness, when he heard the clatter and roar of an approaching, wide-open engine. He looked up to see the same car and the same woman again bearing down on him. He jumped aside, just in time to save himself.
There was a second crash and once more the green motorist proceeded on her devastating way. But now the capsized wagon was a total loss. The milkman was a natural born philosopher. As he stood in the midst of the ruins, he shrugged his shoulders and remarked to the curious citizens who had gathered around, “About that lady’s driving, I can’t say she’s an expert. But you have to give her credit – she’s thorough!”

Yes, in such situations, a little philosophy is good; it helps you to keep cool. But more than that it is of no use, Anurati. You will have to learn a new way of being. If you are here – and you are here – stop philosophizing. Start experiencing because it is only through experience that one comes to know the truth.
Truth is not a conclusion arrived at by logical argumentation; truth is not arrived at through syllogism. Truth is an experience of a silent, still, consciousness. Learn to be more silent and still.
This is the first question from Anurati that I am answering. She must have asked hundreds of questions – I go on throwing them away. The moment I see Anurati’s name, the question goes into the wastepaper basket for the simple reason that I don’t want to nourish her philosophical mind. If I start talking about her philosophical problems she will get more and more into them.
She goes on asking me, “You answer everybody’s question. Why don’t you answer my question?” So today I decided that at least one question should be answered.
Philosophy is a disease – and I know it firsthand. I have been a professor of philosophy – you can trust me! I have suffered from it and I know it is chronic. Once it enters your system it is very difficult to throw it out. I have every sympathy for Anurati, but if the right effort is made you can get rid of it; it is not incurable. And because it never gives you anything… It promises much, but it never supplies any goods.
Just look back. What has it given you? It makes people great bullshitters, that’s all! They go on talking about great things they know nothing of. It may give you a very polished ego, but this is the problem that has to be solved, it is not the solution.
Anurati, wake up from your philosophical dream! However sweet it is, it is a dream. It is so useless that you can always find an argument for anything. Philosophy is a prostitute; it can go with anybody.
Meditate on Murphy’s maxim: To every PhD there is an equal and opposite PhD.
You can argue for, you can argue against. Philosophy has no anchor. It is a game, like chess: it keeps you occupied and gives you a sense of doing something great. But remember, it is all dreaming.

One night Zorba the Greek dreamed that he had to leave his island. So he went down to the port and stepped aboard a boat.
The captain stopped him and said, “You’ll have to pay one hundred drachmas.”
“That’s sheer robbery!” exclaimed Zorba. “I won’t give you more than fifty drachmas.”
“One hundred or you will have to swim!”
“Is that so?” Zorba said. “You better take me for fifty drachmas or I’ll wake up and you’ll lose everything!”

Anurati, please wake up! But people are afraid to wake up. The fear is that they will lose everything because all that they have is nothing but dream stuff. Their philosophy is their dream; their religion is their dream; their knowledge is their dream; their ego is their dream. In their dream they have gathered many things, hence they are afraid to wake up because the moment they wake up all is lost.

One night Mulla Nasruddin dreamed that a man wanted to give him some money. He was very generous, but Mulla was insistent, “Give me a hundred rupees.”
And the man was saying, “Take ninety… Ninety-one… Ninety-two… Ninety-three.”
But Mulla was insistent on a hundred rupees because he could see that the man was so generous. He looked so kind that he might agree on a hundred rupees, so why settle for less?
The man said, “Listen. For the last time, take ninety-nine.
Mulla said, “One hundred!” But he said it so loudly that he woke up. He opened his eyes – the man had disappeared and the money had disappeared.
He immediately closed his eyes and said, “Okay, okay. Give me ninety-nine!” But now there was nobody there. He said, “Don’t be so angry. Ninety-eight… Ninety-seven…”

But there was nobody there at all. It was all a dream. You are dreaming beautiful dreams. Philosophy is a very clever dream.
Anurati, get out of it! This is not the place to philosophize; you can do that anywhere else. Such stupid things can be done anywhere. You need not come from America to India for such stupid things. Do something real, do something authentic. Do something that will transform your life, that will give you a new birth.
Unless you are born again you cannot enter my kingdom of God.

The fifth question:
Osho,
I have traveled all over India, but I have never heard an ill word spoken of this town, Pune.
Perhaps it is because one should not speak ill of the dead!

The sixth question:
Osho,
Why are you against the Greeks? Why do you call them the “Goddamned Greeks”?
The Greeks are great people – I love them. I love Socrates, I love Pythagoras, I love Heraclitus – and of course, I love Mukta. But they are “goddamned.”

A Russian can be cheated only by a gypsy, a gypsy by Jew, a Jew by a Greek, and a Greek only by the Devil.

The seventh question:
Osho,
I am British. Anything I can do about it?
This time it is too late. Next time be a little more careful in choosing your parents!

The eighth question:
Osho,
Can children understand the truth?
Children can understand the truth, but cannot understand that they understand it. They understand more clearly than you can understand because they are more clean, more innocent. They are so innocent that they cannot understand that they understand.
Hence, you need another childhood, a second childhood. First you have to lose your first childhood. That is the whole meaning of the biblical story of Adam and Eve losing paradise; that is losing the first childhood. It is a tremendously significant story. It has so many meanings, it is such a multidimensional parable, that I don’t think there exists any other parable comparable to it.
You can look at it from many aspects. It is losing the first childhood – that is inevitable. Adam and Eve are not committing a sin. In fact, the word sin comes from a root which means forgetting, and that is a beautiful meaning. They are simply forgetting something.
Every child has to forget his innocence. Every child has to get lost in the world. Every child has to go astray, has to make many, many mistakes. He has to suffer. He has to pass through pain, pleasure, and all kinds of dualities, so that one day he can start feeling a great longing to return home. Lost in the deserts of the world, one day a longing arises to go back home.
That longing is sannyas, that longing is religion. And one consciously comes back again to one’s childhood. This is the second childhood. Now one understands, and also understands that one understands. The first childhood is very innocent. It is bound to be lost because it is a natural gift, existence’s gift. The second childhood is never lost because it is your earning, you have become worthy of it. It is no longer a gift; you deserve it. It is growth, not a gift. It is your maturity.
Adam and Eve lose their first childhood; it is in people like Buddha, Jesus Christ, Zarathustra, Moses that the second childhood happens. In Christ, Adam starts moving back toward paradise. If Adam is the going away from paradise, Jesus is the coming back home.
If you watch children, you will see how clear they are about things – far clearer than you are. You are very confused; you have so many thoughts to confuse you. Children are not confused – they don’t have any thoughts to confuse them. Their flames are burning bright with no smoke. They are full of wonder and awe. The moment they see something they immediately understand, because there is no barrier.
If we can help children to be meditative we can change the whole world – its energy, its consciousness. But we teach them something else, never meditation – geography, history and all kinds of nonsense which is absolutely useless. Now, what does it matter where Timbuktu is? I don’t know. I simply love the name Timbuktu – wherever it is! But children are being taught about stupid kings – Genghis Khan, Nadir Shah and Tamerlane. For what? Why are you filling their heads with rubbish?
This is the moment to make them aware because they are naturally aware. If we help them to understand their awareness and their innocence, the first childhood can become a movement into the second childhood.

A French farmer’s son missed a day in school and explained to the teacher that he was absent because of important family business.
“I had to take the bull to the cows,” he explained.
“But couldn’t your father do that better?” the teacher wanted to know.
“I suppose my father is a pretty good lover,” the French lad said, “but in this case I think the bull does it better.”

They are clearer about things, more so than your so-called knowledgeable people.

California is full of crazies. Even the doctors are crazy. A troubled young lady went to consult an MD, complaining that she was having trouble with her menstrual cycle.
“No problem, chick,” said the medico. “Why don’t you just trade it in for a Honda?”

During a visit to the zoo a youngster asked his mother, “Mom, how do lions screw?”
She replied, “I really don’t know, dear, most of your father’s friends are Rotarians.”

“My new husband is a sex maniac,” complained the young lady to the judge. “Ever since our honeymoon he has been making nonstop love to me. I can’t get no rest day or night. I want a divorce.”
“All right,” said the judge, “but first you’ll have to file your application.”
“File my application!” exclaimed the lady indignantly. “Why, that poor thing is so sore, I can’t even bear to touch it!”

A schoolteacher bent too low over her desk to mark a paper and little Johnny in the front seat said, “Teacher, I see something.”
“That’s very rude, Johnny. Tomorrow don’t come to school,” the teacher admonished.
A week later, the teacher bent down to pick up a piece of chalk. Johnny, still in a ringside seat, got up and started to walk to the door. “Where are you going?” asked the teacher sternly.
“Teacher, my schooldays are over.”

Children see very clearly; their eyes are transparent. But soon they have to lose their innocence. We force them to lose it. We fill their heads with such rubbish that their eyes stop seeing. Every parent is trying, every society is trying, every church is trying to fill the child’s mind with stupid things before he starts becoming aware on his own; otherwise he will be a rebel. So by the time you are three or four years old, things have already started being poured into you. You are sent to church, you are taught religion – as if religion can be taught.
Religion cannot be taught, it can only be caught. You can catch it only when you are in the company of a man like Jesus or Buddha. When you are in the company of a man like Yoka, Rinzai, Bodhidharma, you can catch it; it is infectious. But it cannot be taught. A religion that is taught is rubbish. But, as soon as possible, we are very interested in making our children Christian, Hindu, Mohammedan.
In a better world, in a more human world, at least up to the age of twenty-one, children should not be taught any Christianity, Hinduism, Jainism, Judaism, no. Up to the age of twenty-one – when they become capable of voting – they should be left to inquire on their own. And I assure you that Christianity, Jainism, Buddhism, Judaism, Mohammedanism, will all disappear from the world. Up to their twenty-first year, just leave children to themselves and then try to teach them Christianity! They will raise such questions that even you will start suspecting whether Christianity is of any worth. But you force poor children, three years of age… They cannot resist, they cannot protect… They depend on you for their survival, so you can do anything.
This is the greatest crime that can be done to children. Throughout the whole past, parents have been criminals. The greatest crime is that you condition your children’s minds and you don’t allow them the freedom to seek, search and inquire for themselves. Of course, parents have not done it knowingly. Their parents had conditioned them and they were simply repeating a pattern. They were thinking that they were doing it for your own good. In fact, the greatest crimes have been committed for your own good. Whenever somebody says, “I am doing it for your own good,” beware, because nobody needs to do anything for your own good.
Yes, parents need to feed you, to clothe you, to support you, to make you strong in body. They need to support you in your inquiry, in your questioning, and to give you every kind of support and protection so that you can freely inquire. The whole world will then be full of agnostics, inquirers, and that will be the beginning of a true religion on the earth. It has to happen from childhood because it is such a stupid waste of time to destroy their minds first. It then becomes very hard and very difficult to uncondition them. They start resisting because they start getting identified with their own minds.
Every day I receive questions – rude questions, ugly questions – because whenever somebody feels hurt, immediately his conditioned mind reacts and he writes something in anger.
I am trying to help you to be on your own, to be free; you get angry because you don’t want to be free. You have become accustomed to being slaves. But you don’t think it is slavery; you think it is knowledge. It is wisdom. You think you know the Bible, the Gita, the Koran. And when I go on destroying, negating, you become scared. If all your knowledge is taken away, what is left? You are very afraid of nothingness – and that is the true beginning; that is the beginning of a new birth.
Everybody has to become again a nothing, again a child, again innocent; only then will you be able to understand truth.
Children are capable of understanding it, but they are not capable of understanding that they understand it. For that you have to wait a little. But we can prepare the children. We can use their capacity to understand to make them more free, to make them more adventurous, to make them more courageous.
If you really love your children, you will help them to go on an adventure so that they can find God by themselves. It is beautiful to find truth; it is ugly to carry somebody else’s truth on your shoulders. It is simply a dead weight. It cripples, kills; it poisons you.

The last question:
Osho,
There's no question about it, Sarjano is my LSD: a Latin-seducing-Don Juan. The ashram seems to be the right environment and I know you are guiding me through the trip, but what's the right dose to take him in?
Sarjano is a ladies’ man, so don’t waste your time in thinking about the right dose to take him in because tomorrow he may not be available. Eat him totally if you can! There is just one thing you have to be aware of: if you don’t like spaghetti, then eating him is going to be a torture – it will be all spaghetti!

What did the cannibal say after he ate the Italian? – “The meat’s a little on the greasy side.”

So eat him while he is available and don’t waste time in thinking about right proportions – how much to and how much not to. Sarjano is like the wind: he is here today, tomorrow somewhere else. And remember it perfectly well: eat him before he eats you because these Italians are really dangerous people!
Just the other day there was a question: “What is more dangerous than an Italian?” – of course, two Italians!
Enough for today.

============================================================

The first question:
Osho,
The vision of “neither this nor that” feels so negative, so absolutely negative. How can I be accepting or even creative with this? I feel totally confused.
Mind lives in the duality of the positive and the negative. It lives like a pendulum, moving from yes to no, from no to yes. It cannot live in the absolute yes, it cannot live in the absolute no. Absolute yes means now there is no possibility for the pendulum to move anywhere. Absolute no also means the same: no space for the mind to play games. Anything absolute is a death for the mind.
There are two possibilities to kill the mind, to transcend the mind: either absolute yes or absolute no. The Upanishads have used the first possibility, absolute yes. Buddha has used the second possibility, absolute no. But look deeply and you will find they are not different, they are bridged by the same phenomenon – absoluteness. Anything absolute becomes the grave of the mind; it needs duality to exist.
That’s why you are so afraid of the absolute negative because in the absolute you start disappearing. You are your mind. Of course, there is something more in you than your mind, but you are not aware of it. As you start disappearing, fear arises, confusion arises. One is scared, one wants to cling to whatever is available.
It is because of this miracle of the absolute that God has been synonymous with the absolute. God means the absolute. Either say absolute yes and your mind disappears, or say absolute no and your mind disappears.
Why has Buddha chosen to say absolute no, why not absolute yes? – for a certain reason: with the absolute yes there is one danger. The danger is that you may not understand the absoluteness of the yes; you may still go on thinking that it is your old positivity. With the absolute no that danger is not possible. With the absolute no, death seems so clear that you cannot miss it – hence the confusion.
This confusion is good. Don’t try to escape from it, go deeper into it. Soon it will become a chaos – not just confusion, but chaos. When all that you have known about yourself is shattered; when all that you have believed in has evaporated; when all that you were identified with has slipped out of your hands – the very earth beneath you is no longer available, you are falling and falling into a bottomless abyss – that is chaos. Only out of chaos are stars born. Out of chaos is creativity.
You ask: “How can I be accepting or even creative with this?” There is no question of accepting because every acceptance means that deep down there is rejection. Otherwise, why the question of acceptance? Why in the first place do you think of accepting? Somewhere, you must be rejecting.
I don’t accept life because I don’t reject it in the first place. It is simply there, neither rejected nor accepted. It is so. Buddha calls it tathata, suchness.

A man came to Buddha and asked, “What should we do with death? Should we accept it?”
Buddha replied, “There is no question of accepting or rejecting. Death is! It is so. Such is the nature of things: they are born one day and one day they die.”

Why do you think of rejecting or accepting? If you try to accept, that simply means a kind of repression. First you must have rejected. You must be still rejecting and are covering it up with acceptance. Deep down you are angry and on the surface you are smiling; you are all smiles. Deep down you are sad. On the surface you are laughing, trying to hide the fact not only from others but from yourself too.
Friedrich Nietzsche has said, “I laugh because I am afraid that if I don’t laugh I will start crying and weeping. I go on laughing just to avoid the possibility of crying and weeping. I don’t want to cry and weep. I want to forget that there are tears in me.”
But this is just a cover-up; this laughter is not true. This is not the laughter of the buddhas – it can’t be. It is a desperate effort of a split mind. This is schizophrenia: one part wants to cry, another part is trying to hide it. You are in a conflict. But we are brought up in conflict, we have learned how to live in conflict – this has become our very lifestyle. It is not a question of accepting.
True acceptance is not an acceptance at all. You will be surprised by my statement: true acceptance is not an acceptance at all. True acceptance is absence of rejection and acceptance. One simply knows that this is how things are – the suchness of things, tathata. Hence, one of the beautiful names of Buddha: Tathagata. The Buddhist scriptures always use the word tathagata for Buddha: one who lives in suchness, neither rejecting nor accepting; simply seeing whatsoever is the case, only reflecting.
You ask me: “How is creativity possible out of this absolute negativity?” You don’t know anything about creativity. Creativity comes only out of total negation, it comes out of absolute emptiness. The whole world has come out of nothingness and the whole world will one day move into nothingness.
Now scientists have stumbled upon one of the most important discoveries ever: the discovery of the black hole. They say that there are a few spots in existence that can be called black holes; where if anything comes close it is sucked in by the black hole and disappears. It becomes nothing.
But this is only half the story; the other half has still to be discovered. I can predict it will be discovered soon: the white hole. The other side of the black hole, from where things start coming out, out of nothingness. Existence goes into rest, nothingness prevails. When the rest is over, existence again becomes active, manifest; then creativity prevails. Creativity comes out of nothingness.
The more you are a nobody, the more you know that there is no ego in you, the more creativity will flow through you. You will become a vehicle, you will become a passage. Songs will pour out of you – and music and love and joy. Whatever you touch will be transformed into gold; whatever you say will have something poetic in it. Whatever you do will have grace, will have something divine about it, something sacred and holy.
Creativity is nothing that you have to do; you are the barrier. And it is because of you that creativity is being prevented. Make way. Don’t stand in between. Move yourself away and let your void, your inner void, face existence. The inner void will reflect existence and out of that reflection, creativity is born.
But I am not talking about ordinary creativity, where you compose a poem or paint a small picture or where you sculpt. These things can be done without being creative. All that you need to know is the art, the technique of doing them. Out of one hundred so-called creators it is very rare to find even one or two who are real creators; ninety-nine percent are only composers, not creators. They know how to put words together. They are clever, they are cunning, they are crafty; what they are doing is not creativity. They are putting things together – maybe in new arrangements, but there is nothing original.
The original always comes from an egoless state, it always comes when you are absent. When you are absent, consciousness is present, godliness is present. And then something miraculous starts happening, not by you, but through you. It gives you a great feeling of humbleness and gratitude.
So don’t be worried about absolute negativity; that is one of the most beautiful spaces to be in. One can be in that space through absolute positivity also, but there is a danger in that your mind can play tricks with the absolute positive. But it cannot play tricks with the absolute negative. With the absolute positive, it can still hope to remain in some way or other; the positive seems to be sheltering, safe.
Hence, except for Gautam the Buddha, every religion has used the positive. It is only Buddha who has used the negative. But you must know that more people have become enlightened through Gautam Buddha’s approach than through all the other approaches put together. For the simple reason that with the absolute negative there is no safety, no shelter at all for the mind, for the ego. It is total death.
That’s why you are confused. I am happy that you are confused. I will be more happy if your confusion becomes a chaos. I will be still more happy if you disappear into a black hole because then the only thing possible is that you will come out of a white hole. You will be resurrected.
Crucifixion is the way of resurrection. Death is the way of being reborn.

The second question:
Osho,
What is satori and how to attain it?
Satori is exactly your ordinary nature; it is not anything special. Hence, there is no question of attaining it – it is already the case. You are in it, you have just forgotten. You have become too occupied with the outside world. You have forgotten your own kingdom, you have forgotten your own treasure, you have forgotten yourself. You have become too concerned with others. You are in the world too much and you don’t give any time or any space for your inner nature to have a dialogue with you, to whisper a few things to you. You have become artificial.
You have created a false ego because nobody can live without a center. You have forgotten your real center. Nobody can live without a center, so you have created a false center as a substitute. That’s the ego. Ego simply means living with a false center. Satori is dropping the false, entering into the real – just being yourself, your natural self, your ordinary self.
The word ordinary has to be remembered because the mind is not interested in the ordinary at all. It wants to be extraordinary, it wants to be special. It is through being special that the ego survives. It is constantly striving to be more and more special. It wants to be richer, to be more powerful, more respectable; it is ambitious. Hence, the word ordinary has no appeal for the mind. And that is the beauty of the word ordinary – it has no appeal for the mind.
Mind is an achiever and the ordinary need not be achieved; it is already the case. The extraordinary has to be achieved, the extraordinary becomes the goal. It is far away. You have to make all kinds of efforts; you have to struggle for it; you have to fight for it because there are so many competitors.
To be ordinary… And there is no competition at all. You can just be ordinary, nobody has any objection. People will simply feel sorry for you that you have dropped out of the competitive race. One competitor less – they will feel good, but sorry for you. They will say, “Poor fellow! What happened to him? Why did he have to drop out?” The dropouts are not respectable people.
Buddha is a dropout. All real masters are dropouts. To be a sannyasin means to be a dropout. To drop out of the rat race is to drop in because when you are in the race you cannot enter in. When you are no longer in the race, there is nowhere to go. You start moving inward because life is a flow and if there is no outer direction it takes the inner direction. If the goal is not far away in the future, you start moving into your nature in the present. That is satori.
Satori is very ordinary. Satori means your nature. You have come with it; it is your original face – all other faces are masks.
Yoka says:
A disciple speaks in accordance with the ultimate, the absolute truth…
Remember that one should cut the root and not the branches and the leaves.
What is the root of your misery? The root is your ambition, desiring. One wants to be this and that; one wants to possess this and that; one wants to be somebody; one wants to be significant.
Yoka says: …cut the root… Only then are you a disciple. And the moment you cut the root – not the branches, not the leaves – you attain the ultimate truth. The ultimate truth is not far away. It is the immediate truth, it is your truth, it is your very being.
Most people do not recognize the perfect jewel, the jewel of supreme wisdom, satori. It is hidden in the secret place of tathagata, awaiting its discovery. It is to live in your suchness; it is hidden in your suchness. Whatever you are, live in it. Don’t create any conflict, don’t live through the ideal. Don’t be an idealist, just be natural.
But everybody is being taught to be an idealist: “Become a Jesus, a Buddha or a Krishna.” Nobody tells you just to be yourself. Why should you be a Jesus? One Jesus is enough and one Jesus is beautiful – he enriches existence. Many Jesuses just carrying crosses and wherever you go you meet them… It won’t look beautiful, it won’t add to the beauty of existence; it will make the whole world ugly. Wherever you go, you meet a Mahavira standing naked…
It is because of this that existence never creates the same person again. It never repeats; it is original. It always creates a new person. You have never been before and there is no one who is like you; there will never be anybody else like you again. In the whole of eternity, you alone are just like you. Look at the beauty of it and the glory of it; the respect that existence has shown to you. What more respectability do you need? See the uniqueness of yourself. There is no need to be unique. You are already unique, just as everybody else is unique. You are unique in your ordinariness, in your suchness.
Satori is hidden, says Yoka, in the secret place of your suchness, awaiting its discovery….
It has not to be created, it is already there; you just have to discover it. Go in and discover it! It is waiting and waiting. Centuries have passed and many, many lives have passed and you have become addicted to extroversion. You never move in.
The first step toward satori is meditation. Satori is the ultimate experience of meditation, when meditation is fulfilled, when meditation has reached to its ultimate flowering.
Yoka says:
The world is complete illusion, yet nothing exists which might be called illusion.
The world that you have created through your mind is illusory, but there is another world which is not your creation. When your mind disappears you discover that world: the world of suchness. That is a totally different experience. No words can describe it. Thousands of mystics have tried to describe it, but nobody has ever been able and nobody will ever be able to describe it. It is so mysterious, it is so beautiful that all words fall short. No poetry reaches to its level, no music even touches its feet.
The perfect light of this wisdom enlightens one…
The moment you have put your mind aside – mind means ambition, the ego trip of being this and that – the moment you have put the whole mind aside, a great light explodes in you and you are enlightened. This is satori. It does not come from the outside; you are not delivered by somebody else. You are delivered by your own being, by your own nature.
That is possible only by practicing zazen beyond speculation.
You can see clouds naturally in the mirror but to hold on to
the reflection is impossible.
That is possible only by practicing zazen… Satori is possible only by practicing zazen. Zazen means:
Just sitting, doing nothing,
the spring comes
and the grass grows by itself.
You are simply relaxing into your own being, not doing anything at all. It is not a question of doing, it is simply a question of being. You go on relaxing into your being. A moment comes when you are in your utter purity, in your utter simplicity, in your utter innocence. That is satori.
Zazen is a beautiful word. It simply means just sitting – not even doing meditation. In fact, you cannot do meditation. Meditation is just sitting silently; it is not a question of doing. If you are doing something, you are disturbing your meditation.
Somebody is chanting a mantra; he is disturbing his meditation. Somebody is focusing on something; he is disturbing his meditation. Somebody is concentrating, somebody is praying, somebody is thinking of God; they are disturbing their meditation. All these are the doings of the mind and if the doing continues, the mind continues. Stop doing and where is the mind? When the doing disappears, the mind disappears. The disappearance of the mind is satori.
Yoka says that it is beyond speculation. You cannot think about it, you can only experience it. It is the ultimate experience and the immediate experience, of truth, beauty, love, bliss, godliness, and of nirvana.

The third question:
Osho,
I still don't believe that sex is stupid.
It is not a question of your believing or not believing it; such is the case. What can I do? Sex is stupid. I feel sorry for you, but I have to tell the truth some day or other. Yes, I have been telling you, “From sex to super-consciousness,” and you have been very happy. But you only hear “from sex,” you don’t hear “to super-consciousness.”
This is the case with those who are against me and with those who are in favor of me – the same. Man is almost the same; friends and enemies are not very different. I am being misunderstood by the opponents and that is understandable, but I am also being misunderstood by my followers; that is not understandable at all. The opponents can be forgiven, but my followers cannot be forgiven.
Because I said, “Sex is stupid,” many angry questions have come to me. One of my sannyasins, Maya, has written to me: “You have some nerve to say that sex is stupid!” She must have felt hurt. I can understand it. When you are living in a certain way, you don’t want it to be described as stupid. Nobody wants to be called stupid. It is not about the question of sex that you are disturbed, it is your life. If it is stupid and you are living it, you are being stupid. That hurts. But I have to say it even if it hurts because that is the only way to make you aware that there is something more in life; something higher, something greater; something far more blissful, far more orgasmic.
Sex is only a beginning, but not the end. Nothing is wrong if you take it as a beginning. If you start clinging to it, things start going wrong. If I say anything against homosexuality, immediately the homosexuals start writing to me. If I say anything against anything, there are people who will start writing. If it hurts your ego, you are immediately ready to defend – not only defend but to attack.
Whatever you are doing is going to be stupid because unless something comes out of meditation it remains stupid. It is not only a question of sex. The way you eat is stupid, the things that you eat are stupid. And not for any other simple reason other than whatever you are doing is being done without any awareness. Stupidity is sleep. Stupidity is unintelligence.
Just watch people – what they are doing, what kinds of things they are doing. Whatever they’re doing, they are doing it with the feeling that it is the right thing to do, that it is the most intelligent thing to do.

Abby, a well-stacked coed, was undressing when her roommate, Jean, said, “Do you know there is an impression of a large M on your stomach?”
“My fiancé is in town this weekend,” confided Abby, “and he likes to make love with his football-letter sweater on.”
“Which school does he attend, Michigan or Minnesota?” questioned Jean.
“Neither,” giggled Abby, “he goes to Wisconsin.”

But tell her fiancé that this is stupid and he will hit you on your head!

An ugly-looking little Italian guy always succeeded in picking up the best looking girls at his favorite bar every night. The other guys in the bar just couldn’t understand how such a creep could be so irresistible to women.
One night they asked the bartender, “The guy’s scoring so much – what’s his secret?”
“Well,” said the bartender, “I don’t know if the guy’s hung, but he’s the only guy who comes in here who can lick his eyebrows with his tongue.”

But nobody can tell the guy, “You are stupid.”
Whatever you are doing seems to be the most intelligent thing in the world. Whatever space you are in seems to be the right space. Everybody else may be wrong, but not you. You have to become aware of this phenomenon; this is one of the greatest illusions of humanity. You have to be watchful. You have to learn to see that, yes, there are many things that you are doing which are stupid. How can it be otherwise? You are not meditative.
You are not a buddha, you are not awakened. How is it possible that you can do something which is not stupid? So whatever you are doing is bound to be stupid – it is out of unawareness. You go on doing things, not exactly knowing why. How did you learn them? From whom did you learn them? Why did you learn them? There are millions of stupid people just like you and you go on imitating them, you go on learning things from them.
Sex is one of the greatest intoxicants. It is in your very biology. It releases a certain drug into your very bloodstream and you become possessed; you are no longer in your senses and you don’t know what you are doing. You are being forced to do it. Some unknown force – call it nature, biology, chemistry, hormones. Whatever you want to call it – some unknown force, XYZ, forces you to do something. In your saner moments you also know that this is stupid: “What was I doing and why? What have I gained out of it?” And you know those saner moments also.
That’s why, after making love, many women will cry and weep, for the simple reason that the whole thing seems to be so meaningless. Why? – it may be a titillation for the moment, but the same titillation again and again… It is a repetition; you are not reaching anywhere. The man goes to sleep immediately after making love, simply to avoid the saner moment, so he need not think about it. And by the morning he will have forgotten all about it.
After making love, at least for one hour sit in zazen and you will see what I am saying. You will understand what I mean when I say that sex is stupid. After making love, make it a point: sit in zazen for one hour, just watching what has happened. Were you the master of it or just a slave? If you were the master of it, it is not stupid. If you were a slave, it is stupid because by repeating it you are making your slavery stronger, you are feeding your slavery.
It is only through meditation that you will understand what I have been telling you. It is not a question to be decided by argument. It can only be decided by your own meditation, your own understanding, your own awareness.

The fourth question:
Osho,
I'm in Vipassana. Tell me a joke!
I feel for you. Vipassana is really serious! Buddha invented it so that you can pass through hell on this earth and need not go to the real hell. It is a process of cleansing you of all your past karmas. Better finish it! It is a torture because you don’t know how to sit silently for so long. Your mind goes on thousands of trips. Sitting, sitting, sitting… You feel sleepy and that is not allowed. If you start dozing, a hit comes on your head. A really good hit to bring you back to your senses. You cannot escape either because I go on praising Vipassana so much – and without Vipassana there is no satori, no enlightenment.
So you say, “Okay, somehow I will pass through it. It is only a question of a few days. And one thing is certain: many have survived, so there is no danger to life.” Yes, your knees hurt and your body aches; you feel very restless and you are not allowed to move. You have to sit just like a Buddha statue, doing a very stupid thing – watching your breath. Now what kind of a thing is this for an intelligent man to do? Thousands of doubts arise: “What are you doing? Such a nice guy, sitting and watching your breath?” You could have made love to your girlfriend, you could have done a thousand and one things. And delicious food appears… And it looks far better to sit in the Blue Diamond than to sit in zazen! “Why am I sitting here? What am I doing here?”
The mind goes on questioning you and there really seems to be no escape because it is all voluntary; nobody has forced you. Not only that – you have to pay for it! Have you ever heard of anybody paying to suffer in hell? But when you have to pay for it, then one thinks it is worth suffering for.

Mulla Nasruddin was saying that when he came to India for the first time, he was feeling very hungry. As he entered through the Himalayas he came across a man selling some strange fruit, very red, very beautiful. He asked the price. The man said, “Just two paise for the whole bucketful.” So he purchased the whole bucket and started eating it – and it was fire! Tears started rolling down his face.
A man who was watching said, “What are you doing? This is not a fruit. You will kill yourself! This is a medicinal herb; it has to be taken only in very small amounts for particular diseases. What are you doing? You will go mad!”
He said, “Whatever happens… But since I have paid two paise for it, I have to eat it!”
He continued, “I went on crying and the tears went on flowing, but I finished it. I ate the whole bucketful of that nasty thing!”

When you pay, you cannot escape. And we don’t leave any loopholes. We make every effort so that nobody can escape.

A man was in jail for rape, murder, kidnapping and blackmail.
The lawyer said, “I found a loophole in your case. According to Abramovitz v. Arcaro, January 6, 1911: Book III, Section II, page 6, paragraph 13, I think I’ve got the answer. Don’t worry, I’ll get you out. Just leave it to me. Now I’m leaving for Washington on Monday and I’ll be back Friday. Meanwhile – try to escape!”

We don’t leave any loopholes in the first place. There is no possibility to escape either because whenever somebody escapes from Vipassana I send him back again. Vipassana has to be suffered for the simple reason that it makes you encounter yourself, it forces you to encounter yourself – your fidgetiness, your restlessness, your ugliness, your madness. It forces you to see all the rubbish that you are carrying within yourself. And that is one of the most essential steps to go beyond it. If you want to go beyond anything, first you have to encounter it. Without encountering it there is no transcendence. There is no shortcut, there is no way of bypassing it.
It is not that Buddha is a sadist and trying to torture you. He is simply making you aware of what you are. You can never become aware if you remain occupied in your day-to-day business, in your day-to-day engagements. From morning till night you are so engaged that you don’t have any time or any space to look within, to feel yourself; to see who you are, where you are, what you are doing.
Vipassana forces you – there is nowhere to go. You have to watch your breath, you have to look at your thoughts day in, day out.
After the seventh day, something starts settling. If you persist, persevere and if you are patient enough, your body learns to settle. Your mind learns to settle, your breathing becomes calm and cool, almost invisible. You can feel that something has changed, the climate is different. You are not fidgety, you are not restless. Suddenly, as if the sun had risen, all that neurotic fight disappears. The hell is over. A great peace descends on you, the silence that comes after the storm. Everything seems to be clean, very clean, spotlessly pure, innocent, as if a layer of dust has disappeared from your consciousness. Your consciousness seems to be transparent. For the first time you can see the green, the red, the gold of the trees. For the first time you can hear the song of the birds – as if something which was in your ears blocking them and something which was in your eyes like a curtain, has disappeared. Suddenly you feel light, very light.
It is said: “Angels fly because they take themselves lightly.” You suddenly feel that you are so light, so full of light and so light that you can fly, almost fly. Gravitation has disappeared. You have entered into a different world: the world of grace.
You will then know a different quality of laughter arising in you. It will not be painted on the lips, it will be coming from your depth. You will be laughing for no reason at all; you will be laughter. That is Zen laughter – unmotivated, out of sheer joy, out of sheer delight, out of sheer insight into things.
Yes, you need a beautiful joke!

After a day of long discussions at the World Religions Conference in Geneva, Rabbi Zuckerman found himself seated at the same dinner table as Father O’Malley.
The rabbi was partaking of koshered veal, while the priest was cutting into a thick slice of ham.
“Would ya like to try some of this ham, Rabbi?” asked the priest. “It’s really good!”
“Ach, no,” replied Rabbi Zuckerman, “it is against our religion.”
“Ah, but it’s so delicious! Are ya sure ya wouldn’t like a taste?”
“Thank you, no,” said the rabbi. “Since the time of Abraham, the flesh of the swine has been regarded as unclean by our people and pork in all its forms is forbidden to us.”
“Ah! Ya don’t know what you’re missin’, Rabbi,” said the priest, shoving down another mouthful of ham.
“Ach! But you have not tasted the gefilte fish that my wife makes, Father. How about your wife, Father? Is she a good cook?”
“Ah…well, Rabbi, that I cannot say, for I am not married.”
“Not married? So what do you do for a screw?”
“For a…what?”
“I mean – where do you get your sex?”
“Sex?” said the priest. “Alas, Rabbi, in my religion it is forbidden unto us, the servants of Our Lord, to partake of the ways of the flesh.”
“You mean – you’ve never had sex?” asked the Rabbi.
“No, I have not!” replied the priest.
“Oho! You ought to try it… It’s better than pork!”

The fifth question:
Osho,
Do you really think that nothing beautiful has ever come out of Italy?
I am not an expert on Italy. I have not even tasted spaghetti!
My first Italian sannyasin, Veet Sandeh, once prepared spaghetti for me, but it smelled so awful – it smelled just like the Italians! – that I could not eat it. And Veet Sandeh was one of the most perfect Italians. I don’t think she has ever taken a bath in her whole life.
So I don’t really know whether anything beautiful has ever come out of Italy or not, but I can tell you what the experts say. They say that two things have come out of Italy, two beautiful things, but both are possessed by Sophia Loren.

The sixth question:
Osho,
I must be the most greedy person in the whole world. What should I do about it?
Are you confessing or bragging? The world is very big and what do you know about the whole world? It is impossible to be first in anything. Not even in greed can you be the first, because people are moving in circles. Nobody is the first. Don’t become so concerned with your greed and don’t feel guilty either. Everybody is greedy.
Unless you know that you are deathless you will remain greedy; greed comes because of death. You may never have thought about it, but greed exists because we are afraid of death. And because death is there we want to have as much of life as possible. We are greedy. We want to eat more; we want to have as many women or men as possible; we want to have as much money as possible, because death is there. “Soon everything will be finished, so before it happens have all that is possible, don’t miss a thing.” That’s how greed arises. Greed is nothing but fear of death. Greed is out of fear. It is the fearful person who becomes greedy.
The really fearless person is not greedy at all; he shares. He is not possessive, he is very happy to give. He goes on giving whatever he has. He goes on giving for the sheer joy of giving.
You will remain greedy unless you experience your eternity: that death is not going to make any dent in you; that death is not going to make any change in you; that death is only of the body, your consciousness continues. Your consciousness is the only eternal phenomenon. Everything else changes, but not your consciousness. But you don’t know anything about consciousness, hence the greed.
All the religions of the world have been teaching: “Don’t be greedy,” but it hasn’t made any difference. It has made people greedy for the other world, that’s all. It has made people greedy for heaven and heavenly joys, that’s all. But it hasn’t changed their greed; it has even increased their greed. I don’t tell you not to be greedy. I say be conscious, be more conscious and you will be surprised. As your consciousness grows, greed starts disappearing. It starts falling like dead leaves; it leaves no trace behind.

Skolnik, the Scarsdale skinflint, awoke one morning to find that during the night his wife had died. After one glance at the stark form lying there beside him, he leaped out of bed and ran into the hall.
“Daisy,” he called down to the maid in the kitchen. “Come to the foot of the stairs, quick!”
“Yes,” she cried. “What is it?”
“Only one egg for breakfast this morning!”

Can you beat that?

When the Internal Revenue Service hauled him in and wanted to know why he claimed his mother as an exemption, in spite of the fact that she had been dead for five years, Bernstein said, “Oh, but Mom is still very much alive in my heart.”

A Jewish couple went to a shopping center and left their child and carriage with the others in front of the place. After shopping, they started to head for home. A few blocks later, the wife turned to her husband, who was wheeling the carriage, and cried in panic, “That’s not our child!”
“Shut your big mouth!” he replied. “This is a better carriage.”

People are living in greed. It will be difficult to be the first! Even to be aware that you are greedy is a good sign. It is a beginning, a good beginning, if you become aware of it. And remember, don’t feel guilty about it because that is a way of losing your awareness again. Don’t start repenting of it because repenting means you are thinking about the past, which is no more. Don’t start trying to be non-greedy because whatever you do will be greed, even the effort to be non-greedy will only be rooted in greed. One can become so greedy about being non-greedy.
I have seen people who have become so greedy about being non-greedy that they go on and on renouncing this and that. Their greed has taken a new turn: it is standing upside down, it is doing a sirshasana, a headstand. Now they are greedy about non-greed; non-greed has become their possession, their money, their power. Now they are respected for their non-greed. They were respected first for their money, now they are respected for renouncing the money. Now they go on renouncing as much as they can – to the fullest extreme. They can renounce clothes, they can stand naked. They can renounce everything, but deep down the greed is there, they are still greedy. It is simply greed and nothing else. Now they are hoping that they will be rewarded in paradise – a great reward is waiting for them.
So don’t try to become non-greedy. A greedy person cannot do anything about greed. And that’s so about other things too. An angry person trying not to be angry is not going to change his being. A violent person trying to be nonviolent will still remain violent; his violence will now take subtle forms.
The only thing that is possible is to be conscious of your greed. I am not saying that you will be rewarded in paradise, I am not saying anything about the future. I am simply saying that if you become aware of greed it disappears. And when it disappears, life is a bliss here and now – not in the future, not as a reward.
Greed cripples you, anger cripples you, violence cripples you. When they all disappear… And they all disappear through one method. A single method is enough – meditation is enough. All the diseases disappear with a single medicine.
The words medicine and meditation come from the same root. Meditation is the ultimate medicine; it cures you of all ills.
Remember Yoka again. He says: “Don’t cut the branches, cut the root…”
Unconsciousness is the root. Cut the root, be conscious and herenow you are a new person. Herenow, your life is transformed, you become luminous, you radiate bliss, you radiate benediction; you become paradise.
Wherever a man of awareness moves there is paradise. You cannot send a man of bliss, of awareness, of meditation, of satori, to hell because if he reaches hell, it will be paradise for him. And you cannot send an unconscious man into paradise because wherever he is he will find his hell. If it is not there he will invent it – his unconsciousness will project his hell.
Reduced to a simple principle, the whole philosophy of all the awakened ones is: “Unconsciousness is hell, consciousness is heaven.”

The seventh question:
Osho,
I was born on February 29, hence my birthday comes only once in four years. Is there some significance in it?
January or February or March, February 28 or 29 – these are all arbitrary. These are our imposed ideas. Existence knows nothing of February, March. Even if you were born on April 1 there is no significance in it! You will not be a bigger fool than you are, you will be the same. What significance can February 29 have? But people want some significance.

I have heard about only one accident that has happened on February 29: that is the birth of Morarji Desai.

Zoo keeper to the tourists: “In this cage we see the leopard. This animal has one black spot for every day of the year.”
Old lady: “What about a leap year?”
Zoo keeper, thinking fast: “Ah yes – behold, madam, I lift his tail thus – behold the 29 of February!”

And the last question:
Osho,
How do you manage to deliver so many beautiful discourses?
What discourses? You call this yakkety-yak discourse? Discourse is a serious phenomenon! Discourse is something religious, holy, sacred. It is delivered in churches, temples. This place is not a church. This place belongs to the drunkards – it is a pub! What discourse? I have never delivered any discourse. Yes, I gossip, that is true, but there is no gospel in it and there is no art, no secret in it. It is very simple – my method is very simple.

A great emperor was passing through a village. He was one of the most famous warriors of those days and he was a lover of archery. He loved people who were perfect archers. Passing through the village he saw on many trees, lampposts and garden fences, arrows sticking exactly in the middle of circles – exactly in the middle, at the centers of the circles. So many arrows everywhere… He was surprised.
He asked, “Who is this man? I have never seen such a perfect archer! His aim is perfect, he never misses, not even by a fragment of an inch. The arrow always goes exactly into the center. Each target proves it.” He stopped his chariot, called to the people of the village and asked, “Who is this man?”
They laughed and said, “Don’t worry about him. He is a madman!”
He said, “What do you mean by madman? He may be mad, but he is the greatest archer I have seen.”
They replied, “It is nothing to do with archery. He knows nothing about archery.”
The king said, “But then it is a puzzle. How does he manage it?”
They replied, “It is simple. First he shoots the arrow at the tree and then he goes and makes a circle around it!”

That’s exactly my method. It is simple. Hence, you can ask anything. Whatever I want to say, I say it. First I shoot the arrow and then I draw a circle around it – just as a finishing touch!

A parish priest was having a few words with his bishop and in the course of conversation said, “It’s all right for you, my Lord. When you prepare a sermon you can deliver it to several churches in the diocese, but I have to give two new sermons every Sunday.”
The bishop replied, “You should be able to give a sermon on almost any subject at a moment’s notice, as I can.”
“I’ll take you up on that,” said the parson. “Come to my church next Sunday and I will put you to the test.”
The bishop agreed and in due course went to the pulpit to find a card with the one word constipation written on it. Without hesitation he started, “And Moses took two tablets and went out onto the mountain side.”

Enough for today.

============================================================

The first question:
Osho,
It feels that to be a witness is also a kind of thought. So what is the difference between the witness and a thought of the witness?
Witnessing is not a thought, but you can start thinking about witnessing, you can make it a thought. The moment you make it a thought, it is no longer witnessing. Either it is witnessing or it is a thought; it cannot be both together.
When you are witnessing, you are not thinking that you are witnessing. If you are thinking that you are witnessing, this is not witnessing at all; it is another kind of thought. If the witnessing is simple, there is no thought of witnessing at all. If the thoughts are just passing in front of your vision and you are witnessing them, and no idea arises in you that “I am witnessing,” then it is pure witnessing. It is not a thought at all, it is a state of no-thought, no-mind. You are simply reflecting whatever is passing by.
The moment you say, “Aha! This is witnessing. So I am witnessing. This is what meditation is; this is awareness,” you have missed the point. You have fallen back into the mud of the mind. You are no longer a witness. You have become identified. Witnessing cannot be reduced to a thought.
But your problem is significant. It is encountered by almost every meditator. We have become so habituated to witnessing in a wrong way. We think that we witness. We judge, we evaluate and think that we are witnessing. We think that we witness; it is not witnessing. We are associated with a wrong kind of witnessing and that idea lingers for a long time. We have become so conditioned to immediately reducing every experience into a thought. We never allow any experience to remain just a pure experience, even for a few moments.
You come across a beautiful roseflower in the garden. The moment you see it, almost instantly you say inside, “How beautiful!” You can’t let that beauty sink in. The thought of beauty becomes a barrier. The moment you say, “How beautiful!” you have already started comparing it with other roses that you have seen in the past. You have started comparing it with all that you have heard about roses. You are no longer seeing this rose. You are missing its suchness. You have gone into the past. You are searching in your memory to find how many roses you have seen before and to declare: “This is the best one.” But this rose is no longer there in your awareness. Your awareness has become very clouded. So much smoke has come from the past, so much dust has arisen that your mirror is no longer reflecting the beauty. You are not now-here.
Allow the rose and its fragrance, its beauty, its dance in the wind and the sun, to penetrate you. Don’t bring your mind in. There is no need to say it is beautiful. If it is, there is no need to say it; if it is not, then it is false to say it. Either it is or it is not. Creating a thought about it in any way is creating ripples in your consciousness. It is like throwing a pebble into a silent lake. Just a moment ago it was reflecting the moon and the stars so beautifully, but your pebble has created ripples; the moon and the stars have all become distorted. That’s what happens whenever a thought arises in you: your consciousness is disturbed, it starts wavering. Waves start arising in you. Now you are not capable of reflecting that which is.
You will have to learn this new art of seeing things without judging; of seeing things without verbalizing; of seeing things without evaluating. See the rose, the bird on the wing, the night full of stars; see the river passing by, see the traffic. Listen to the songs of the birds or a train passing by. Start learning a new art of just being reflective, not bringing any thought in, not saying anything at all.
It will take a little time – old habits die hard – but one day it happens. If you persist, if you are patient enough and if you go on and on working at cleaning your inner world, one day it happens. The benediction of that day is immense. In fact, that day you are born anew. You start seeing the same world with new eyes because your eyes are so clear. Your mirror reflects so deeply, so totally, without distortion, that trees – the same trees that you have seen before thousands of times – are far greener than they have ever been. And their greenness is no ordinary greenness. It is luminous, it is radiating light.
It is the same world, the same people. A Buddha, a Jesus, walks in the same world – the same trees, the same rocks, the same people, the same sky – but he lives in paradise and you live in hell. The difference is created by the mind.
It will take a little while to drop this mind. It has dominated you for so long that in the beginning it is difficult to suddenly disassociate yourself from it. It clings. It can’t leave its power over you so easily. Hence, it goes on coming in from the back door.
You are sitting silently and a beautiful stillness arises. The mind comes in from the back door and says, “Look, how beautiful this moment is!” And it has taken you away. It came so silently, without making any noise and you were caught by it in such a subtle way, that you could not have been aware of it. You rejoiced, you thanked the mind, but it has destroyed your stillness.
When stillness is really true there is no mind to say anything about it. When witnessing is true you are simply a witness. You don’t think, “I am witnessing.” There is no “I,” there is no thinking; there is only the witness – because all thinking and the “I” have all become contents, objects of your witnessing. And witnessing itself cannot be its own object. No mirror can reflect itself. Your eyes cannot see themselves. Your witness cannot witness itself, that’s impossible.
Your question is relevant. You will have to be very, very careful, watchful. It is a razor’s edge. One has to be very cautious because if you fall, you fall into a deep abyss. The ordinary people cannot fall; they have nowhere to fall to – they are already at the bottom. But as you start moving higher, the possibility of falling down grows every day. When you reach the Everest of your consciousness, just a little slip, just a little wrong step and you will go rolling down into a deep abyss.
The greater the meditation, the more is the danger of losing it – naturally. Only a rich man can be robbed, not a poor man. That’s why a beggar can sleep under a tree in the afternoon with the noise of the traffic and the marketplace; nothing disturbs him. He can sleep anywhere, he can sleep deeply. He has nothing to lose – no fear.

Once, at night, a king came across a very strange man, a very luminous man, standing alert underneath a tree. He was so silent, so quiet and so alert. The king was curious: “Why is he standing there?” From his appearance he looked like a monk, one who has renounced the world. The king was a very cultured man and he thought, “It is not right to disturb him.” But it happened every night.
That was the routine of the king: to go around the capital at night in disguise to see how things were going; whether the guards were on duty or not; mixing and meeting with people; going into the hotels and the theaters to find out how things were going – whether things were all right or not.
Every night he would come across this man. He saw this man so many times that it became impossible to resist the temptation. One day he approached him and asked, “Excuse me, sir, I should not interfere – you look so silent – but why do you go on standing there the whole night? What are you guarding? Is there any treasure underneath this tree?”
The mystic laughed. He said, “Not underneath this tree, but within me there is a treasure and I am watching it. It is growing every day and is becoming bigger and bigger, hence I have to be more and more alert.”
The mystic continued: “You can sleep, you have nothing to lose. I cannot, I have much to lose. If I can remain awake I have much to gain.”
The king was very impressed. He asked the mystic to come to his palace – he invited him. The monk agreed. The king was a little puzzled: a monk agreeing so soon, without even refusing once, is not thought to be right. A monk should say: “No, I cannot come to the palace. I have renounced the world. It is all futile. It is all dream, illusion, maya. I cannot come back to the world. I am happy wherever I am.”
But this monk didn’t say anything. He was a Zen master. The king started thinking in his mind, “Have I been deceived by this man? Was he simply standing there every night just to ensnare me?”
But now it was too late; he had invited him.
The mystic came to the palace and lived with the king. Of course, he lived more joyously than the king because he had no worries, no cares about the empire, no problems or anxieties. He enjoyed good food. The king had given him the best room in the palace – and he lived just like an emperor.
Six months passed. Now the king was boiling within and had to ask him, “What kind of renunciation is this? You are enjoying everything – servants, good food, good clothes and a beautiful palace.”
And one day, while they were walking in the garden, he said to the mystic, “Can I ask you a question? Forgive me if you feel offended. This is my question: What is the difference now, between me and you?”
The mystic looked at the king and said, “Why did you wait for six months? You could have asked me this question on the very first night. The moment you invited me and I accepted your invitation, this question arose in your mind. Why did you wait for six months? You tortured yourself unnecessarily. I was waiting for it at any moment. There is no question of my feeling offended – it is a natural question.
“There is a difference, but it is very subtle. If you really want to know the difference, come with me. I cannot tell you here. I will tell you in a certain space, at a certain place. Come along with me.”
They both went outside the city. The king said, “Now can you tell me?”
The mystic said, “Come along.”
When they were crossing the boundary of his empire – it was evening – the king said, “What are you doing? Where are you taking me? Now this is the end of my empire. We are entering somebody else’s kingdom and I would like to be answered. What is your answer? I am feeling very tired.”
The mystic replied, “My answer is that I am going. Are you coming with me or not? I am not going back.”
The king said, “How can I come with you? I have my whole empire, my wife, my children. How can I come with you?”
The mystic said, “That’s the difference. But I am going!”
Again the king saw the light, the beauty of the man and fell at his feet. He said, “Come back! I am just stupid. These past six months, I have missed. I have been thinking things which are really ugly. Forgive me and come back.”
The mystic said, “There is no problem for me. I can come back, but you will think the same again. It is better for me now to go ahead – that story is finished, that chapter is closed – so that you can remember the difference.”

The witness lives in the world just like a mirror, reflecting everything. He may be in a hut, he may be in a palace; it makes no difference. What difference does it make to a mirror, whether the mirror is in a hut or in a palace? What difference does it make to the mirror whether the mirror is reflecting beautiful diamonds or just ordinary stones? It makes no difference to the mirror.
Witnessing is the art of transcending the world.
Witnessing is the very essence of Zen, of religion itself. But don’t make it a thought – it is not a thought at all. Thoughts have to be witnessed. Even if the thought of witnessing arises, witness that thought. Remember that it is not witnessing, it is only a thought – it has to be witnessed. It is there in front of you. You are not it.
The witness is irreducible to any thought; it always goes on sliding back. You cannot catch hold of it through any thought. It can witness each and every thought, the thought of witnessing included; hence, it can never itself become a thought.
Next time when you are meditating remember it. Don’t start enjoying the thought: “This is a beautiful moment. My mind is silent, my being is still. This is witnessing!” The moment you say it, you have lost it.

The second question:
Osho,
Please say something more about the man of Zen.
The man of Zen is very ordinary – extraordinarily ordinary. He is so ordinary that there is every possibility if you meet him, you will not be able to recognize him. He lives just like you, eats like you, sleeps like you. He is in every way just like you. As far as his outside is concerned, he is not different from you at all.
The difference is certainly there, but that difference is inner. He has an insight, he has a clarity. He has eyes and you are blind. He is awake and you are asleep. You are drunk: drunk with greed, drunk with lust, drunk with anger, ambition, ego.
The man of Zen is simply not drunk; he is in his senses. He walks consciously, he sits consciously: walking in Zen, sitting in Zen. He is not in any way special. He is not like other so-called saints. He will not lie down on a bed of thorns or on a bed of nails, he will not stand on his head. He is not stupid, he is not an exhibitionist. He will not walk naked in the streets. He is not mad, he is not neurotic. He lives in a very ordinary way, in a very normal way.
That’s why it is the most difficult thing to recognize the man of Zen. You can recognize a saint who walks on water – naturally, it is so obvious that he is special. But a man of Zen does not walk on water. He does not perform any miracles. He does not play any kind of egoistic games. He is not an ego, he is not even a person. He is just a presence, a nonentity. He is absolute nothingness. Only when one is absolute nothingness, is one full of awareness. Whatever he does, he does with totality. Only a man who is not drunk can do things totally. Otherwise one remains partial. Only a part goes on doing something and at the same time, other parts may be going against it, being destructive. You may be creating something with one hand and destroying it with the other. A man who is drunk does not know where he is going. He thinks he is on the right path, but he is dreaming.

Barry Higgins, a traveling salesman, was driving home to London one afternoon after a hard-drinking lunch with a prospective customer. Through the rearview mirror he spied the flashing blue light of a police car. A shiver went up his spine and he grasped the steering wheel tightly to steady his driving. The blue light approached, a siren wailed and a police car overtook him with a hand signaling him to pull in and stop.
Barry was nervous as he saw the policeman get out of his car. His breath was heavy and his hands were moist on the steering wheel. He wondered what he was going to say.
The policeman came up and bent to speak through the car window. “Ay, ay, now then, had a few, eh?”
Barry could not stop himself and blurted, “Ohh…g…good onsternoon, afterble, I…I’m not as think as you drunk I am!”

The man of Zen is absolutely conscious – no greed, no anger, no jealousy, no ambition. These are all intoxicants, these are all drugs; they go on keeping you sleepy. It is a miracle how you manage your life with so many poisons running in your bloodstream, in your very being. That is the only difference; otherwise, from the outside, you will not know.
There are other so-called saints who make outside differences because there is no inner difference. They have to stand naked, they have to torture their bodies, they have to go on fasting. They have to distort their bodies, cripple their bodies. They have to do something that makes them more special than you, “holier than thou.”
A Zen man is not “holier than thou.” He has no idea of being in any way higher than you. He is simply living his nature.
Yoka says:
The man of Zen goes alone…
That is his first characteristic. He is not part of a mob psychology. He is not Hindu, Mohammedan, Christian, nor is he Jewish. He is not Indian, Japanese, nor Chinese – he cannot be. He never belongs to any crowd. He is alone. He is a rebel. He lives according to his light. He does not follow, he does not imitate. He has reached the goal.
What is the goal? – the goal is not somewhere outside you. It is not there, far away like a star. It is within you, it is your own interiority. He has entered his own interiority. And the man who has reached his goal…
…can play on the path of nirvana.
His life becomes a play. He is playful, he is not serious. He cannot be serious; the whole of life is a divine play, leela. He is part of it. He is just playing a role. He acts the role as beautifully as he can, as perfectly as he can, but he knows that the whole world is a big stage, a great drama – but nothing more. So he is not serious about it.
The man of Zen has natural manners and is harmonious.
He does not pretend to be special, he has natural manners. He is very human, utterly human. His humanity is superb, intense, absolute. He does not claim any sacredness and because he does not claim it, he is sacred – he is harmonious. He is not divided within himself, he is not in a constant fight with himself, he is not in a constant civil war. He has a melody, a music. If you sit by his side you will be able to listen to the music.
Just the other day, Navanit asked: “Osho, whenever I come close to you, I immediately smell a certain fragrance. What fragrance is it?” I don’t use any perfume – I cannot. Navanit is a doctor, he knows; hence the question has become more pertinent to him. He says that he always finds the same fragrance whenever he is close to me.
That fragrance has nothing to do with any perfume. It is the fragrance of harmony, it is the music. It expresses itself in a multidimensional way. Sometimes you will hear it as a silent sound like a murmur: the wind passing through the pine trees, or the sound of running water. Sometimes you will hear it as music and sometimes you will feel it as a smell, a beautiful fragrance. Sometimes you will see it as an aura, a light, very mysterious.
But the man of Zen simply lives in harmony and out of harmony all these things are manifested.
His spirit is simple, clean, pure and sincere…. His Zen, which no one sees, is treasure beyond all value.
You can see his body, you cannot see his Zen. You cannot see his inner meditativeness, you cannot see his awareness unless you become aware yourself. You can know only that much which you have experienced.
Navanit, you are blessed that you are feeling a certain fragrance. That means you are reaching to a certain depth, a certain height in your being.
His Zen, which no one sees, is treasure beyond all value. This jewel, rare and of incalculable value, never changes however one uses it. And others can freely benefit from it on all occasions.
The man of Zen is always overflowing with joy. You can share it. He is a giver: he gives delight, he gives joy, he gives beauty, he gives truth. He radiates truth, he radiates godliness, but so silently, without any declaration. He goes on pouring his blessings into existence. He is a blessing to the world.

The third question:
Osho,
I know my love stinks, so why do I cling to the smell?
We live according to the past; our lives are rooted in the dead past, we are conditioned by the past. The past is very powerful, that’s why you go on living in a certain pattern. Even if it stinks, you will go on repeating it. You don’t know what else to do; you have become conditioned. It is a mechanical phenomenon. And this is not only so with you, it is so with almost every human being – unless he becomes a buddha.
To become a buddha means to get rid of the past and to live in the present. The past is immense, very huge, enormous, of millions of lives. You have lived in a certain way. Now, being here, you may have become aware that your love stinks, but that awareness is also not very deep; it is very superficial. If it becomes really deep, if it penetrates to the very core of your being, you will immediately jump out of it.
It is as if your house is on fire you will not ask anybody how to get out of it. You will not consult the Encyclopedia Britannica; you will not wait for some wise man to come and tell you; you will not consider whether it is appropriate to jump out of the window or not – you won’t bother about anything. Even if you are taking a bath you will jump naked out of the window; you won’t even bother about clothes. When the house is on fire and your life is at risk, now everything else is secondary.
If your love stinks – this has become your experience – then you will just come out of it. You will not simply ask a question, you will jump out of it. But I think that it is just an intellectual idea because each time you are in love, some misery arises; each time there is some conflict, some struggle, some fight, some jealousy, some possessiveness. So you have started taking an intellectual standpoint: “My love stinks, so why do I cling to the smell?” – because it is not yet really an existential experience for you.
And it is your own smell. One becomes accustomed to one’s own smell. That’s why when people are alone they don’t experience that smell, they experience it only when they are together with somebody.
When you are in love, you start showing your real face. Love is a mirror. The other starts functioning as a mirror. Every relationship becomes a mirror. Alone, you don’t experience your own smell – you cannot; one becomes immune to it. You have lived with it so long, how can you smell it? It is only with the other that you start feeling that he stinks and he starts feeling that you stink. And the fight starts… That is the story of all the couples all over the world.

“Where are you going with that goat, Juan?” asked the policeman.
“I’m taking him home to keep as a pet!” replied Juan.
“In the house?”
“Sure thing.”
“But what about the smell?”
“So what? He ain’t gonna mind the smell!”

Your own smell is not disturbing to you. In fact, if it suddenly disappears you will feel a little jolted; you will feel a little uprooted. You will not feel your natural self; you will feel something has gone wrong.
If you love and there is no jealousy, you will start wondering whether you love or not. What kind of love is this? There seems to be no jealousy! You love a man and if he goes with another woman once in a while, you don’t make much fuss about it. You take it for granted – it is perfectly good for a change. And if your man is happy, why not let him be happy? You love him. If you really love him you will respect his happiness too. He is not going forever.
In fact, if once in a while couples are allowed a little freedom, they will not separate; divorces will drop in the world. Divorce exists only because marriage is too tight. Let marriage be a little more relaxed and divorce will disappear. Divorce is only a by-product of marriage. The tighter the marriage system, the more divorce becomes an absolute need. If divorce is not allowed, then you have double lives: one to show to the society and one to live.
It is because of marriage that prostitution exists in the world. The whole blame goes to the marriage system. If people are a little more loving and less jealous, if they understand nature, it is simple. You eat the same food every day; you get fed up with it and once in a while you would like to go to the hotel. The hotel food may be worse than what you get at home, but even that is good – at least that makes your home food look better. When you come back the next day you feel so relieved that you are back home and you are so happy to have the same food again!
The more man’s mind is understood, the more and more marriage will have to be made a little relaxed. It is perfectly okay to give a few days off in marriage. The woman should be allowed to have her boyfriends and the man should be allowed to have his girlfriends – at least, just as you have Sunday religion, a Sunday marriage! You will be surprised that your own wife looks far better. Again a honeymoon starts – a mini honeymoon. You again start from ABC.
And being with many women and with many men does not destroy marriage – no, not at all. It is a very nonsensical idea that has prevailed over humanity: that it is destructive to marriage and family. It is not so – it is very supportive. It will help the family to be more joyous, less quarrelsome. Otherwise, the woman is constantly spying on the husband and the husband is constantly spying on the woman. What love can exist between two persons who are constantly at each other’s throats?
Yes, your love stinks, as everybody else’s love stinks, but you feel it only when you are in a relationship. You have not yet felt that it really has something to do with you. Deep down you still feel that there must be something wrong with the other. That’s how the mind functions; it throws the responsibility on the other. It accepts itself and it is always finding fault in others.

Several people are sitting in the front row of a movie theater. The show has already begun when suddenly there is a terrible smell.
One of the spectators turns to the man sitting beside him and asks, “Did you shit in your trousers?”
The man beside him answers, “Yes, why?”

People accept themselves totally! Whatever they are doing is right: “Why? What is wrong in it?” They are his own trousers, so who are you to interfere? And freedom is everybody’s birthright!
If your love stinks, try to find out what exactly it is that stinks. It is not love, it is something else. Love itself has a fragrance; it can’t stink, it is a lotus flower. Something else must be in it – jealousy, possessiveness. But you have not mentioned jealousy and possessiveness. You are hiding them. Love never stinks, it cannot; that is not the nature of love. Please try to see exactly what it is that creates the trouble. I am not saying to repress it. All that is needed is a clarity about it – what it is.
If it is jealousy, I would only suggest one thing: be more watchful of your jealousy. When it arises next time, rather than becoming mad, close your doors, sit silently, sit in meditation, watch your jealousy. See exactly what it is. It will surround you like smoke, dirty smoke. It will suffocate you. You would like to go out and do something. But don’t do anything. Just be in a state of non-doing because anything done in a moment of jealousy is going to be destructive. Just watch. I am not saying repress it because that is again doing something.
People are either expressive or repressive and both ways are wrong. If you express, you become destructive to the other person. Whoever is your victim will suffer and is going to take revenge. He may not take revenge consciously, but unconsciously it is going to happen.
Just a few months ago, Krishna Bharti fell in love with a woman. Nothing extraordinary about it, but Deeksha went mad. Deeksha could not accept the idea. For centuries we have been told that if a man loves you or a woman loves you and the man or the woman goes to somebody else, that is a rejection of you.
That is utter nonsense. It is not rejection; in fact, it is just the opposite. If a man loves the woman and he enjoys the woman, he starts fantasizing how it will be with other women. It is really the joy that this woman has given him that triggers his fancy. It is not that he is rejecting this woman. It is really an indication that this woman has been such a nourishment that he would like to see and know how other women are. If a little rope is given he is not going to go very far, he will come back because with the other woman it may be novelty. It will be something new, but it can’t be that nourishing because there will not be any intimacy. It will have something empty about it. It will be sex without love.
Love needs time to grow, it needs intimacy to grow. It needs a really long time. It is not a seasonal flower that blooms within three, four weeks, but then within three, four weeks it is gone. It is a long, long process of intimacy. Slowly, slowly two persons melt and merge into each other, then it becomes nourishing. The other woman or the other man cannot be nourishing. It may be just an adventure, a thrill. But suddenly the feeling will arise – it is bound to arise – that it is good fun, but it is not nourishing. And the person will be back.
Krishna Bharti would have been back, but Deeksha went mad. She behaved just like any other woman. But I was waiting… Sooner or later she was going to take revenge. Now she is taking revenge. Krishna Bharti fell ill, he was in hospital and Deeksha had a little freedom. She fell in love with her own handyman! He really proved handy! Now K.B. is in hell.
There is no need to be so worried about it. I have sent K.B. a message: “Wait, don’t be worried. Just let her take revenge. It is good that the unconscious burden is finished.”
If we understand each other a little more, if we understand human nature a little more, there should be no jealousy. But it is a past heritage of centuries.
So I cannot say that you can drop it right now. You will have to meditate over it. Whenever it possesses you, meditate over it. Slowly, slowly the meditation will create a distance between you and the jealousy. The more the distance, the less jealousy will arise. One day, when there is no jealousy, your love releases such a fragrance that no flower can compete with it. All flowers are poor compared to the flowering of love.
But your love is crippled because of jealousy, possessiveness and anger. Remember: it is not love that stinks because I have seen people who think it is love that stinks so they close up, they become closed; they stop loving. That’s what has happened to millions of monks and nuns down the ages; they became closed to love, they dropped the whole idea of love. Rather than dropping jealousy, which would have been a revolution, rather than dropping possessiveness, which would have been something of immense value, they dropped love. That is easy, that is not much; anybody can do that. To be a monk or to be a nun is very easy, but to love and not to be jealous; to love and not to be possessive; to love and let the other have the whole freedom is really a great achievement. Only then will you feel love and its fragrance.

The fourth question:
Osho,
What do you think? Is Jesus coming back to earth again as he had promised or not?
Once a man becomes awakened he cannot come back. He promises out of his compassion, but it is not possible. It is not possible because it is against the law of life. Jesus has promised to come back; Buddha also has promised to come back; Krishna has also promised to come back. Nobody has come yet and nobody is going to come back. It is against the law of life.
They promise because of their compassion, their love. They promise because they see your misery, they see your sad state of affairs, they see your tears. So they promise and their promise fulfills a certain purpose. Because of their promise you go on remembering them and that remembrance helps you. Because of their promise you go on connecting yourself to them, surrendering to them and that surrendering helps. But they cannot fulfill their promise.
Once a man is awakened there is no possibility of his being born again. One can be born only if something in him has still remained unconscious. Life is an opportunity to become conscious. It is a school, a training school, where people become centered, rooted, integrated. Once they have become integrated, once they have attained self-realization, they cannot be allowed back into the school. They disappear into the universal. They become part of existence.
So the first thing to be remembered: Jesus, Krishna or Buddha cannot come, but that does not mean that awakened people will not be there. There will be people like Jesus, Buddha, Krishna – of the same quality. Maybe their faces will not be the same and their bodies may not be the same…
Who would like to have a body like Jesus? You don’t know about Jesus, that’s why. He was only four feet five inches and a hunchback! It is said in the old scriptures that he was the ugliest man who has ever walked on the earth. Who would like to have his body?
But his disciples have said he was the most beautiful man. They saw his beauty; that is of the inner, hence there is no contradiction. The disciples saw the inner. They saw the real Jesus, the pillar of his consciousness. They saw his interiority. They communed with his being. And yes, there has never been such a beautiful man.
But the others saw only his body. The others could not see his soul, the others could not see his Zen. Only his disciples could see his Zen, his meditativeness, his love. Only his disciples could feel who he was, his divineness. They could say, “He is the most beautiful man who has ever walked on the earth.”
The descriptions are so contradictory that it has been a problem for the historians to decide what is right. Both are right; there is no need to decide. It is not a question of choosing this or that.
In the second place, even if it were possible for him to come back, do you think he is mad? What did you do with him when he was here? Just remember it; you tortured him as you have never tortured anybody else before him.
Socrates’ death was not a torture. He was given poison and within minutes he was dead. His death was a silent one.
The way Jesus was crucified is one of the most violent ways. Sometimes it takes three days for the person to die. Just nailing a man on a cross cannot kill him immediately. Slowly, slowly blood starts oozing from his body. Life starts oozing out, but very slowly. Even the weakest man will take at least six to eighteen hours to die. If the man is healthy he can take even three days or more. This is real hell! This is real torture!
He was dying on the cross and people were throwing stones and abuse at him. Soldiers were poking their spears into his body and blood was coming out. He was alive, he was thirsty and they would not give him water. He was crying for water. One hundred thousand people had gathered to see this torture.
What did you do with Jesus when he was here? I think that was enough to keep him away from this earth forever!

A new arrival knocked on heaven’s door. Jesus was on duty and he opened the door.
“Who are you?” he asked.
“Adolf Hitler,” came the reply.
“Adolf Hitler! You cannot come here. You are a megalomaniac bent on world domination. Get away!”
“But I want to mend my ways!”
“No way! Get out!”
“Ah, if you will let me in, I will give you something.”
“Well,” said Jesus, weakening a little, “what is it?”
Hitler, in dress uniform, pulled off his special Iron Cross and showed it to Jesus. “Well,” he asked, “can I come in?”
“Just wait here. I’ll go and ask my dad.”
Jesus found God in his study. “Dad, there’s a newcomer at the gate who wants to come in.”
“Who is he?”
“Adolf Hitler.”
“Adolf Hitler! That megalomaniac bent on world domination? He can’t come in here!”
“But he has something very special to give me.”
“What is it?”
“His Iron Cross.”
God thumped his chair. “What do you need an iron cross for? Hell, you couldn’t even carry that wooden one!”

You forced poor Jesus to carry his own cross. He was weak and he had not slept the whole night. The whole night he was tortured and questioned and investigated. And then he had to carry that big wooden cross. He fell thrice on the road under the burden of the cross. He was hurt and wounded, but the soldiers whipped him again and forced him to carry his cross.
He was only thirty-three years old. He had not seen much of life yet; in fact, it was just the beginning. Had he lived as long as Buddha, the world would have been far more enriched. Buddha lived eighty-four years; Mahavira lived eighty years; Krishna almost the same age. They died at a ripe old age. They saw the whole of life with all its ups and downs, success and failure, misery and joy, ecstasy and agony. They became mature and ripe. They could give something immensely valuable to the world.
Jesus was allowed only three years. He started his ministry when he was thirty years old and he was killed when he was thirty-three. Just three years! He could not do much. He could have done great work for humanity, but we killed him. And now we are waiting for his next coming.
If he comes, you will do the same again because you are doing the same again to people of that quality, of that insight. You have always been behaving as inhumanely as possible with the buddhas.
Jesus is a buddha. That is the exact meaning of the word christ. Christ and buddha are synonymous. Buddha means the awakened one, christ means the crowned one. It is awakening that becomes your crowning, that makes you an emperor, that takes all suffering away from you and gives you the kingdom of God.
No, even if he could come he would decide not to. Man has not learned anything. After Jesus, you did the same with al-Hillaj Mansoor. The behavior toward al-Hillaj Mansoor was even more ugly. And the same is the attitude of the masses even today. Nothing has changed. Man seems to be stagnant, stubborn – just living an unconscious life and repeating it.
But why should you be waiting? You can find the awakened ones any time; they are always available. Fortunately, there is always somebody who is a buddha. Those who are real seekers are bound to find him because he is also seeking and searching for the real seekers. It is not a one-way search.
If you have come here in search of me, I am also searching in my own way for you. It is not one-way. If you are here, you are here only because I have invited you to be here. You are here only because I have called you forth to be here.
Now don’t waste your time thinking about whether Jesus will come or not. What do you want with Jesus? I am ready to give you all that Jesus can give to you. Be receptive, be surrendered because he will ask for the same conditions to be fulfilled. He cannot just deliver you as you are. You will have to fulfill a few conditions. You will have to drop your ego; that is the basic requirement. Fulfill that.
I am your Jesus. Of course, the body is different, the mind is different, but the consciousness is never different. Two awakened persons are exactly the same. They belong to the same dimension, the same fragrance, the same harmony; the same bliss, the same godliness.

The fifth question:
Osho,
Is there a place for competitive sport in the new commune?
In the new commune there will be a new organization called: “Athletics Anonymous.” When you get the urge to play golf, baseball, or anything else involving physical activity, someone will be sent over to drink with you until the urge passes.

The sixth question:
Osho,
I am a Jew, Italian and a psychologist! Is there any hope for me?
You are really fortunate! There is every hope for you; in fact, you cannot miss. Even if you want to miss you cannot because the Jew is going to kill the poor Italian; the psychologist is going to kill the poor Jew and when there is nothing left for the psychologist, they almost always tend to commit suicide!

And the last question:
Osho,
Are you pushing my pleasure button? When I sit in lecture I am all smiles and it takes me hours to wipe it off my face.
Parmita, you fool! Why do you try to wipe it off? I make so much effort to create it and you take hours to wipe it off. Never do it again – so that it becomes something permanent, essential, natural with you; something that surrounds you.
But I know people are afraid of smiling because if you are caught red-handed by others smiling for no reason at all, they will think you are crazy. So people repress their smiles. That’s why Parmita must have been trying to wipe it off.
But when I push the button, I really push the button and now I am going to push harder! You will not be able to wipe it off even if you make an effort for hours or for days. Enjoy it! And why does it matter if people think you are crazy? Why be worried about it? There is nothing wrong in being crazy. Here, at least, everything is crazy.
Just the other day somebody asked, “Osho, there are so many clocks in the ashram. Why do they all show different times?” Just crazy – cuckoo clocks! If they all show the same time, what would be the need for so many clocks? One would be enough!
Parmita, a joke for you:

A young nurse’s first duty on her new job was to bathe the man in room 305. She performed her task and quickly returned to the nursing station.
Her supervisor, an old, seasoned nurse asked, “How was he?”
“He was doing fine,” she said, “but there was a very strange thing… He had the word little tattooed on his prick.”
The older nurse was very curious and decided to check it out. She returned forty-five minutes later, hair messed up, clothes askew and said to the young nurse, “Honey, that tattoo does not say ‘little.’ It says, ‘Little Rock, Arkansas, Pride of the South’!”

Enough for today.

============================================================

The first question:
Osho,
Why do I want to wake up when, as you say, “Awakening only happens when I am not?” This seems very paradoxical.
The ego is not your real self; the ego is a false entity, arbitrary. It is the ego that is your sleep, that surrounds you like a darkness, like a cloud. Hidden behind this darkness is your real self, your real being; which wants to wake up; which wants to get out of all this smoke, out of all this darkness; which wants to get out of the prison of the ego.
There is really no paradox, it only appears so. It appears paradoxical. Your question seems relevant… But you have two selves. One is the real: the one that you were born with; the one that was even before your birth; the one that will be there even when death has happened; the one that is running underneath like a hidden current. The other is created by you, by your family, by your church, by your society, by your state, by the crowd.
This false one is a pretender; it pretends to be the real self. The real self wants to come out of this unreal one surrounding it. It is a constant suffering for the real self because the real is being suffocated by the unreal; the real feels imprisoned in a dark cell. The real self is vast and has become confined in a very small space. It is crippling and paralyzing.
So when I say that awakening happens only when you are not, I mean when your false ego is no more. That is the only “I” you are aware of right now – that is the “I” you are identified with. Hence, I say that whatever you know of yourself will not be there when awakening happens. That does not mean you will not be there. You will be there, but that “you” will be so new, so utterly discontinuous with this “you” that you are living right now, that it is better not to mention it at all.
Hence, Buddha is silent about it. Not only that, if you insist, he calls your real self anatta, a no-self. He calls it thus for the simple reason that to call it also a self may be confusing. The false is known as the self; if the real is also called a self, you may get confused. You are already very confused. Buddha calls it a no-self.
But don’t lose heart. Don’t be worried and don’t be afraid that you will die completely. As you are, you will not be there, but you will be there as you should be. Your natural, spontaneous being will be there.
Buddha is also right in calling it a no-self because when the real self is there you don’t have any idea of “I.” The “I” is also a thought. The real self has no idea of “I”; the real self is one with the universal self. It is not separate from existence, it is not an island. The unreal self is separate and creates separation, hence, the unreal self creates misery. To be separate from the whole is to be miserable. To be one with the whole is bliss. The paradox is only apparent; there is no paradox in reality.

One Sunday morning at the parish of St. Mary’s, Little Wakefield, the signboard announcing the subject of the day’s sermon read: “And forgive us our trespasses.”
A few yards away, stuck into the grass, was another sign which read: “Trespassers will be prosecuted.”

Just like that, there is no real contradiction, but it appears to be there. On the one hand, a sign says: “And forgive us our trespasses,” and on the other hand another sign says: “Trespassers will be prosecuted.” But they are not concerned with the same object; their meaning is totally different.
When I say that you will not be there, I am talking about the artificial self – the one which you are not, but which you have come to believe that you are. Your real self will be there – the one which you are but which you have forgotten completely.

The second question:
Osho,
Please comment on these words of Yoka:

By zazen we can obtain directly to the ultimate truth. The scholars like to teach others but have no deep convictions themselves. Once you have revealed your prejudices you can see your true self. How can you wander off into external struggles?
Yoka’s words are always tremendously beautiful. He is one of the greatest Zen masters. There have been many Zen mystics, but there is a difference between a master and a mystic.
A mystic is one who has known the truth, but is absolutely incapable of relating it to others. He has no means, he cannot devise methods, he has no skills. He cannot paint it, sing it, dance it, and he cannot say it. He is utterly dumb. The experience leaves him almost drunk – utterly drunk. You can see that something has happened, something of tremendous import. You can feel a certain vibe around him. You can try to understand what has happened. But from his side there is no effort to communicate, to commune. He is so dazed by what he has seen, he is in such an awe that he has forgotten language. He has entered into no-mind and he has forgotten the way to the old mind. First, he used to live in the mind, then he tried hard to find the way toward no-mind. Now he is in no-mind, but he has forgotten the way to the mind. He cannot use the mind – he has lost his mind. He is almost, to all practical purposes, mad – absolutely joyous, overflowing with bliss, beauty, grace; something worth seeing, something of the beyond, but of no practical use.
The master is one who has reached the ultimate, but is capable of coming back down to the world where you are. The master is one who has reached the Everest of consciousness, but is able to come down back to the dark valley where millions of people are still living. To communicate to them something about the incommunicable, to make a few gestures toward the highest peak. Maybe one in a million will be able to look at the moon where his fingers are pointing, but even that is more than enough.
The master is something, plus. The mystic knows, but cannot help you to know. The master knows and can help you to know.
Yoka is a master, a master of great skill. Hence, his words have to be meditated upon – his each word is significant. He says:
By zazen we can obtain directly to the ultimate truth.
First: By zazen… Zazen means just sitting and doing nothing. That is the most unique phenomenon in Zen; nowhere else has it happened. No other religion has been able to create this device of just sitting. Every religion provides you with something to do: chant a mantra, say a prayer, repeat certain words from the holy scriptures or go through a ritual, but do something. Physical exercises, yoga, or some mental exercises: visualization, concentration, contemplation. But one thing is certain: all the religions have provided you with something to do.
Zen says – and there is great insight in it – that if you go on doing something, the mind will go on living; you will never be able to transcend it. You may be able to control it, but control is not transcendence. You may be able to make it more virtuous, but to be virtuous is not to know the unknowable. To be virtuous is a choice and whenever you choose you are choosing bondage. All choices lead to bondage.
Somebody becomes a sinner – he has chosen iron chains; somebody becomes a saint – he has chosen golden chains, beautiful chains, valuable chains. But chains are chains; whether they are made of gold or of iron makes no difference. In fact, golden chains are far more dangerous because with the iron chains sooner or later you will get fed up, you would like to get out of them – they are humiliating. With the golden chains you may feel that they are not chains at all, they are ornaments. You may start loving them, you may start clinging to them – they are so valuable! You will be happy that you have them. You will look on others who don’t have them as poor people, unfortunate people.
Your saints look on sinners as unfortunate. They feel sorry for them because they think that the sinners are bound for hell and they are going to heaven. Both are in hell. Hell is divided in two parts – let me tell you the truth. In one part saints live, in the other part, sinners. Sinners live a little more of an uncomfortable life – a third-class prison you can call it. In India there used to be class divisions during the British Raj: third class for the criminals and first class for the political leaders – for Mahatma Gandhi and Pundit Jawaharlal Nehru, etcetera. Just like that, in hell there are two divisions: one is for sinners, the other is for saints.
Saints are provided with a little comfort. They have already suffered too much in being saintly, hence they have to be compensated. The sinners have enjoyed too much, hence a little suffering will bring balance, but there is not much difference. Whenever you choose you are in a bondage.
Zen teaches choiceless awareness: neither this nor that, neti-neti. It teaches you absolute negation. That is the meaning of zazen: doing nothing, neither singing a song from a film nor saying a prayer; just sitting silently, doing nothing.
The moment you do something, the mind becomes powerful because the mind is the doer. The moment you are a doer, the ego comes back. The ego is a doer. When you are in a state of non-doing, the mind has to cease, the ego has to disappear.
Non-doing is the death of the mind and the ego; that is the meaning of zazen.
Yoka says: By zazen we can obtain directly to the ultimate truth. There is no need to wait, there is no need to grow gradually. One can know the truth directly. Nothing else is needed; one can know the ultimate truth immediately. It is a quantum leap from the mind to the no-mind.
Learn the art of just sitting silently, doing nothing. The spring comes and the grass grows by itself.
Zen is a method of sudden enlightenment, not of gradual enlightenment. There is no question of gradual enlightenment, there is no question of degrees. Either you have it or you don’t have it. Zen says: “Take the jump, be courageous, and have it in its totality. It is possible right now. It is possible only now. Either now or never.”
The scholars like to teach others but have no deep convictions themselves.
Avoid the scholars – they don’t know themselves. They have learned from the scriptures; they have not experienced it directly, they have not seen it directly. They have not realized it. It is not their own experience. Avoid the scholars.
Once you have revealed your prejudices you can see your true self.
All that is needed is to drop your prejudices. Your mind consists of your prejudices: of being Indian, Japanese, Italian, German; of being Hindu, Jewish, Mohammedan.
That’s why I go on hitting the Italians, the Germans, the British, and the Indians. Now I am getting so many requests from Spanish sannyasins who are writing letters: “Osho, why are you leaving us out?” And Australian sannyasins are writing: “Have you completely forgotten about Australia?” Wait! One by one, I am going to hit everybody! I am not going to leave anybody out.
All your prejudices have to be destroyed, demolished. Only then will you be able to come to your reality.
Yoka says:
How can you wander off into external struggles?
Once you have dropped all your prejudices – your mind – all your extroversion disappears, all your ambitions disappear. Then there is nothing to achieve. You have already found the treasure of treasures: the kingdom of God.

The third question:
Osho,
Why can I take almost everything lightly except my husband, Pravasi? Why do I fight him so? Why do I always try to change him?
It is one of the most ancient stories. It has nothing to do with you or Pravasi in particular. The institution of marriage is an ugly institution – the ugliest, in fact. All other ugly institutions are based on the institution of marriage.
The day marriage disappears from the world, states will disappear, nations will disappear because they all need the family as a base. Churches will disappear, religions will disappear. The whole past is rooted in the family and the family is rooted in the invention of marriage.
Marriage is ugly because it destroys the freedom of two persons. Freedom is the ultimate value for me. Anything that destroys freedom is against human nature. When your freedom is destroyed you are angry, you are in a rage. And on whom are you going to throw all your rage? The wife finds the husband, the husband finds the wife. They are close, available and bound together in such a way that escape is not easy. The society has made it in every way difficult or almost impossible.
Marriage has an entrance, but no exit. Or, even if the exit has become possible in a few countries, it is not really respected. It is condemned, a subtle condemnation. Marriage is praised. The priests go on saying, “Marriages are made in heaven,” and “This is something sacred.” The whole establishment depends on the sacredness of marriage. But it is not sacred, it is really very ugly. It has destroyed the whole of humanity.
And you cannot take revenge on the priest because he is not directly there; he functions in a very indirect way. You cannot take revenge on the politician; he is very diplomatic. All that you can find is the other person – the wife, the husband – tangibly, physically present, so your anger starts pouring out on the other.
Husbands and wives are continuously quarreling, fighting, as if they were enemies. It is very rare to find a couple which is friendly. They show friendliness when they are with others; when guests come, immediately they start smiling. They wear masks before their children, they avoid clashes. They don’t fight on the streets, but they are fighting twenty-four hours a day. Their fight takes so many forms; it is multidimensional. It dissipates their energy. And they have to live together, so somehow they have to make it up.
Sex just becomes a method for making things smooth, for making up. First fight, then, because you have to live with the other person, use sex to show love and tenderness – so that for the time being there is peace. But that peace does not last long; it is just a cold war, not peace. Again the war will erupt. In the morning, the same story will be repeated. And unless we become aware that something very stupid has been propounded in the name of marriage, this is going to continue.
My sannyasins, at least, should become aware: your husband hasn’t done anything wrong to you; your wife hasn’t done anything wrong to you. If anything is wrong, it is the very bondage, the very feeling of bondage that is wrong. Drop that bondage. Give each other more freedom. Respect freedom more than anything else because freedom is the ultimate value – even higher than love. If your love brings freedom, it is good. If your love does not bring freedom, it is not good – it is not love either.
Your love brings jealousy, possessiveness; it never brings freedom. It destroys all possibilities of freedom. And it started from the very beginning…
Forget what your rabbi told you! What does he know about romance? Here’s the way it really happened:

“Adam, baby,” said Eve as she presented him with a bouquet of forget-me-nots she had picked in the Garden of Eden, “do you absolutely and truly love me?”
“Sure,” said Adam. “Who else?”

Your story started then!

I have heard that every day when Adam returned from his day’s adventures, in the night, Eve would count his ribs!
It is a very ancient story. In the very beginning, something went wrong. You may know, you may not know that Eve was not the first woman. God first created Adam and Lilith. The first night, the honeymoon night – the first honeymoon – a quarrel started because there was only one bed. And in those days double beds were not available. This is the story of the beginning; there was just a single bed. So who should sleep on the bed and who should sleep on the floor?
Of course, Adam was as much a male chauvinist pig as anybody! He was muscular, more powerful, so he possessed the bed. But Lilith was not willing to agree. She said, “We are equal, we are made equal.” She was the founder of the Lib Movement, the real founder!
They fought so much. I don’t know whether clothes were thrown at each other or not, but if there were clothes, they must have been thrown. In the middle of the night they knocked on God’s door and Lilith said, “This cannot go on. Either I have to be accepted as an equal or I am finished with this man.” So the marriage was not consummated.
And God, being himself a man, of course favored Adam. So he dissolved Lilith and by taking out a rib from Adam’s body, he created Eve. To make sure that Eve was always going to be secondary, he took just a part of Adam’s body, not more than that, so that she could not claim equality. She would have to sleep on the floor!

Now what kind of foolishness is this? Just a double bed was needed! Our Asheesh could have done it – it was so simple. But God was very miserly.
You are simply repeating an old story, an old pattern. Get out of this old pattern. Being a sannyasin, that should be the first thing.
There is no need to take your husband Pravasi seriously. Why that poor man? What has he done to you? If you can take everything else lightly, why take your husband seriously? Seriousness is a disease. When you take somebody seriously, sooner or later you will take revenge because you cannot remain serious for long. One wants to be happy and take things in fun.
But you alone are not at fault. Pravasi must also be making sure that he is being taken seriously. Every husband has been doing that for thousands of years: he should be taken seriously – he is no ordinary person, he is your husband!
In India, husbands have taught the women: “Your husband is your god.” Husbands teaching the wives! And they have forced the poor women to accept them as their gods. But they take revenge – they are bound to take revenge. They cannot accept it. No being can accept such indignity.
But the woman’s way is more subtle. The man’s way is gross; he imposes his superiority by beating his wife. The wife imposes her superiority by torturing him in very subtle ways – in such subtle ways that he cannot even defend himself.
When somebody is fighting with you, attacking you in a gross way, there is a possibility of defending yourself. You can learn karate – Satchidananda can help you – you can give him a few good kicks. Every woman should learn karate because enough is enough. So when your husband tries: “Take me seriously,” you can give him some good karate kicks. You should learn karate shouts too, so that the whole neighborhood knows what is happening.
Life has to be light. Neither the wife has to be taken seriously nor has the husband to be taken seriously. Seriousness is not a good thing. Between two persons, seriousness creates a wall; it destroys intimacy. But if you are bent upon dominating each other, naturally you have to be serious. You cannot dominate playfully. If you become playful and take things in fun, you cannot be dominant, you cannot have any ego trip. The ego functions only in the climate of seriousness.

“Dear,” asked the husband, “what exactly is hypnotism?”
“Hypnotism,” replied his wife, “is getting a man into your power and making him do whatever you want him to do.”
Snorted the husband, “That’s not hypnotism – that’s marriage!

Husbands are trying to force their wives to be just shadows to them. And the wives are trying to force the husbands to be just shadows to them. The whole idea is inhuman, irreligious, insane, neurotic.
If you really want to celebrate life, don’t make such demands on life. Take things nonseriously. Remember, how long has it been since you laughed with your husband? How long has it been since you danced with your husband informally? Not in a formal setting, not at some marriage, or in some Rotarians’ meeting or Lions’ meeting and not in some formal setting, but just out of sheer joy. How long has it been since you sat silently together listening to music, not arguing, not talking, not nagging; not doing all that nonsense that goes on in the name of marriage?
A wall is created between the wife and the husband. The society perpetuates the wall. And you are so stupid that you go on helping the society to destroy your relationships, to destroy the beauty of your relationships.

Walking down M.G. Road, the middle-aged guy said to his wife, “Hey, did you see that pretty girl smiling at me?”
“That’s nothing,” said the wife, “the first time I saw you I laughed out loud!”

A Frenchman came home early one day and found his best friend in bed with his wife.
Shaking his head in disbelief, he said, “You know I have to, Pierre – but you?”

Mr. Schmendrick came home earlier than expected and found his wife in bed with a strange man.
“What are you two doing?” he bellowed.
“See what I mean?” said the wife to her lover. “A schnook!”

The Bravermans married off their last daughter and decided to sell their house and move into a furnished apartment.
Mr. Braverman showed his wife the apartment he had rented.
“I don’t like it,” said Mrs. Braverman.
“Why not?” asked Mr. Braverman.
“There are no curtains in the bathroom. Every time I take a bath the neighbors will be able to see me in the nude!”
“Don’t worry,” said her husband, “when the neighbors see you in the nude, they’ll buy the curtains!”

“Ah, yes, my late wife was a most remarkable woman,” the mild old Englishman told one of his cronies on a park bench in London. “A very religious woman,” he continued. “Never missed a day in church and at home it was prayers and psalm-singing from morning to night.”
“How did she come to die?” the friend inquired.
“I strangled her.”

You say: “Why do I always try to change him?” Stop! Otherwise, if he strangles you, it will be difficult to save you. Every wife goes on trying to change the husband; that is a subtle strategy to dominate. It is a condemnation: “You are wrong and you have to be put right.” And husbands can’t defend themselves because they do a few things which they themselves think are bad, so they can’t defend themselves.
For example, they smoke and admit that it is wrong, so the wife goes on nagging them, “Stop smoking!” In fact, the more she nags, the more the husband has to smoke because he becomes more nervous. And when he is nervous, there is no other escape than smoking. If he does not smoke, he will strangle the wife! So he strangles a cigarette, or he starts chewing gum; otherwise he will chew on the wife! He has to do something just to keep himself engaged, so that this moment of anger passes by.
The wife has a good point there; she is just doing it for your sake – for your health, for you to live a long life. And the husband wants to die as soon as possible. With this woman… To live a long life! He goes on smoking more in the hope that smoking really does kill!
He drinks and you are against it – and he is against himself because the whole atmosphere is that he has been told it is wrong and he has accepted the idea. So he cannot say that he is right – he has no guts to say that he is right. He has to accept that the wife is right. And wives don’t smoke, they don’t drink, they don’t gamble, they don’t do anything wrong. They are so saintly! That is one good thing about being saintly – you can torture everybody! In fact, if you cannot torture everybody you will not be a saint at all – the whole joy is lost.
Wives are very holy and very religious for the simple reason that they can torture their husbands, they can torture their children, they can torture everybody. They are so holy; in comparison to them, everybody is a sinner.
The husband comes home shaking, trembling. He knows that he is doing wrong things. And there is nothing wrong in smoking. There is nothing wrong if you drink once in a while; it is absolutely human. Have you ever seen any animal smoking? That makes you distinct! Otherwise, what is distinctive about you? Have you seen any animal drinking, going to the pub, carrying bottles of beer? That makes you human; nothing wrong in it!
Just the other day I received a letter. A woman from Vinoba Bhave’s ashram had come to see our ashram. She could not see anything else. She writes that she had no time to come and listen to the lecture, no time to participate in the meditations, but she had enough time to go to the Blue Diamond and to other hotels to see what sannyasins were eating. She writes: “I have found out that not all sannyasins are vegetarians and they drink. And, Osho, you should stop them from doing this because if they are religious, if they are meditators, how can they be nonvegetarians and how can they drink?”
I don’t see that there is any problem. Jesus used to drink and he was religious – as religious as Buddha – in fact, a little more religious, because Buddha must have been a little afraid that if he drank, his religiousness might be lost. Jesus must have been absolutely certain about his religiousness; that a little drink here and there did not make much difference. And, as far as alcohol is concerned, it is absolutely vegetarian – nothing wrong in it.
But the woman took note of these things. In the first place, a woman; in the second place, coming from a Gandhian ashram… So, doubly wrong! That was all that she could find.
Mohammed was not a vegetarian, neither was Ramakrishna. I don’t think that Krishna was a vegetarian, nor Rama, nor the seers of the Upanishads, nor the rishis of the Vedas. They were not vegetarians. Still they attained to the ultimate. So just what you eat and what you drink can’t make much difference.
I am not telling you to eat meat. I am simply telling you that if it is possible, it is cleaner not to eat meat. But it has nothing spiritual about it. It is aesthetic not to eat meat, it is poetic not to eat meat, but it has nothing religious about it. I am not telling you to become drunkards, but I cannot say that it is unspiritual; once in a while, getting a little ecstatic from a little drink is perfectly okay and human.
My whole approach is human. I don’t want you to become sad and serious holy people. We are tired of all these saints!
Please don’t try to change him. Love means acceptance, accepting the other as he is. These are the ways of hate. Trying to change someone is not love. And don’t be after him. He has not done anything wrong in getting married to you. Don’t make him suffer too much. He has not done anything wrong, so why punish him so much? Give him freedom. In giving freedom you will find your freedom too, because we can get freedom only if we give freedom.
When two persons give freedom to each other, only then can love grow. In absolute freedom, absolute love grows. And when love and freedom are together, their beauty is immense.
My sannyasins have to live freedom, love, meditation, bliss. Drop all these wrong patterns of creating misery for each other.

The fourth question:
Osho,
Why are you so against knowledge?
Knowledge is destructive of something immensely valuable in you; it destroys your wonder. It is through wonder that one becomes aware of godliness, not through knowledge. You need wondering eyes like small children. You need the capacity to feel awe before the sunrise, before the sky full of stars, before a roaring ocean. If you cannot feel awe you cannot feel godliness because godliness is a mystery. It is available only to those who are capable of feeling awe, who are capable of being mystified.
Knowledge destroys wonder, destroys the capacity to feel awe. It makes you capable of explaining away everything. It takes away all poetry from life. It takes away all meaning from life. The knowledgeable person is never surprised by anything. He has explanations for everything – why should he be surprised? In fact, no explanation is true. Explanations don’t explain anything at all. The mystery remains. The mystery is infinite.
But the knowledgeable person becomes so burdened by his knowledge that he loses the mirrorlike quality of reflecting the beauty, the benediction, the dance, the ecstasy of existence.
Hence, I am against knowledge because I am in favor of knowing. Knowing is a totally different phenomenon. Knowing means innocence; knowledge means cleverness, knowledge is cunning. Knowing is simply a heart phenomenon, knowledge is a head thing. Knowledge means you have a lot of information, means you have gathered much information in your memory; your memory has become a bank. Your memory is nothing but a biocomputer. It does not make you wise – no, not at all; you can repeat only that which has been put into your memory in the first place. Memory can never give you any original experience, any original insight. It takes away many things and gives you nothing – except that you feel more egoistic because you think you know.

Strolling through the card room of a business club, Stimson was surprised to see three men and an Airedale terrier playing poker. Pausing to watch, he commented on the extraordinary performance of the dog.
“He’s not so smart,” said the Airedale’s owner. “Every time he gets a good hand he wags his tail!”

Perkins dropped over to visit Nelson, a new neighbor. They were sitting in the den talking, when a dog came in and asked if anyone had seen the Sunday Times. He was handed the newspaper and left.
“That’s remarkable,” exclaimed Perkins. “A dog that reads!”
“Oh, don’t let him fool you,” said Nelson. “He just looks at the comics.”

Dixon, seated in a movie theater, noticed that the man in front of him had his arm around the neck of a huge Afghan hound that occupied the seat next to him.
The dog was watching the picture with obvious understanding for he snarled softly when the villain spoke and yelped joyously at the funny lines.
Dixon leaned over and tapped the man in front of him on the shoulder. “Excuse me, but I can’t get over your dog’s behavior.”
“Yeah, I’m surprised too,” said the man. “He hated the book.”

The knowledgeable person becomes absolutely incapable of experiencing surprise, of experiencing the mysterious, the miraculous. Even if God stands in front of him he will say, “So what?” Nothing can surprise him, hence nothing delights him.
Jesus says, “Unless you are like small children you will not enter into the kingdom of God.”
Knowledge has to be put aside, so that you can reclaim again those beautiful moments of your childhood when you were running after butterflies, collecting seashells and colored stones on the seashore; thinking that you had found a treasure. Those colored stones were far more significant to you than Kohinoors. You have to regain that fairyland. You have to look again with those eyes at the world; it is full of godliness. The birds singing, a distant call of the cuckoo, the flowers… Everything is so wonderful that wherever you look, wherever you move, you would like to give thanks, you will feel grateful. You would like to kneel down on the earth and pray. You will not need to go to any church or to any temple; there is no need. The whole existence becomes the temple – it is the temple.
I am against knowledge because knowledge hinders your wisdom. Unless you put knowledge aside, your nature cannot explode into intelligence. Put knowledge aside and you will be in for a great surprise – you start behaving in a different way, in a spontaneous way.
Knowledge is ready-made; it keeps you tethered to the past. Hence, all your responses are out of date, never to the point; always falling short, and are never adequate, can never be adequate. Life goes on changing every moment, it is always new. And your response is not a response, it is a reaction; it comes from the past. You have a ready-made answer. You have not even looked at the situation and you have repeated the ready-made answer like a gramophone record.
Hence you lag behind life. And if you lag behind life you can’t have blissfulness in your being. You will always feel that you are missing, you will always feel that something is missing. What is that something? You are not in step with life. You will always dream that you are rushing and running toward a station; by the time you reach it, the train is moving away from the platform. That dream is symbolic; it simply shows that you are never alive to the moment, you are always late. It is because of your past and because you think you already know the answers. Hence you never listen to the questions, you never listen to the situation that is confronting you.
A Zen story…

Two temples were traditionally antagonistic to each other. Both priests had a small boy to run errands and both priests told the boys, “Don’t talk to the boy from the other temple. We are enemies!” They were afraid that boys being, after all, boys they may start becoming friendly with other. If the priests had not said anything they may not have thought about it, but when they insisted that they should not talk to each other, of course, the temptation was too great.
So one day, one boy asked the other boy when they met on the road, “Where are you going?”
The other boy said, “Wherever the wind takes me.”
Listening to philosophical discussions and discourses, he had also become philosophical.
The other boy was almost dumb. He could not think of what to say now. And then he thought, “My master is right – these people are dangerous! I am asking a simple question, ‘Where are you going?’ and he is talking metaphysics!”
He went back. He told the master, “I am sorry that I didn’t obey you, but this has happened.”
The master said, “This is very bad – we have to defeat him! It has never been so. We have always been victorious in every argument with the other temple. So tomorrow you ask him again, ‘Where are you going?’ and when he says, ‘Wherever the wind takes me,’ ask him, ‘And if the wind is not blowing at all, then?’”
The boy was very happy! He arrived a little earlier, stood there, waited and repeated many times what he was going to say in order to become perfectly clear about it.
The other boy came and he asked, “Where are you going?”
And the other boy said, “Wherever my feet take me.”
Now the answer was irrelevant; whatever he had prepared was meaningless. He was again at a loss. He asked the master again.
The master said, “Those people are cunning and crafty! Now, whenever he says, ‘Wherever my feet take me,’ you ask him, ‘If you were born paralyzed, then what?’”
Again the boy came. He asked, “Where are you going?”
The boy said, “I am going to fetch vegetables.”

Life is like that. You come with a prepared question and it changes, it says, “I am going to fetch vegetables.” No prepared answer is going to help. Knowledge is not going to help as far as life is concerned. The knowledgeable person is almost a dead person; he lives in his grave.
Come out of your graves. Live more spontaneously, more responsibly. Respond to the moment. Listen to the moment and act accordingly. Then your act will be total because it will arise out of the present; it will reflect the actual situation. It will be really meaningful, significant, satisfying, fulfilling. And you will find that you are no longer missing. You are in step with life, you are in harmony with life.
Innocence is always in harmony with life. To be harmonious is to be enlightened. To be harmonious is the only way to know the ultimate truth.

The fifth question:
Osho,
Why do the Jaina monks live naked?
They suffer from clothestrophobia!

The sixth question:
Osho,
Whenever I get off on the jokes you crack, underneath my laughter I get run over by a bulldozer and end up feeling like a mashed potato! How long can an over-and-over-mashed potato survive?
Have you survived yet? Are you still there?

The distraught woman went to hospital and said, “It is my husband – he was run over by a steam roller. Could you tell me which ward he’s in?”
The nurse said, “Ah, he must be the one who is in wards four, five and six!”

Here you see that all are mashed potatoes! It is very difficult to know who is who – just orange potatoes!
Your question is coming a little too late. You are finished already. Now nothing can be done. You can’t put a mashed potato back together again. That is impossible!

The last question:
Osho,
I work for the Osho Ashram, Pune, India. Please… Tell me a joke!
Why a joke? I am not miserly! I will tell you three jokes!
The first:

The Italian bride and groom went into the honeymoon suite. The bride, eager to go but still a trifle bashful, insisted that they turn off the light and undress in the dark.
She made it into bed in seconds and lay there sighing deeply. “Oh, my darling,” she said, “I just can’t believe I’m really married.”
She heard a scuffling sound in the darkness and repeated, “Oh, my darling, I can’t believe that I’m really married!”
From out of the darkness, the bridegroom’s voice said furiously, “If I ever manage to get this zipper unjammed you will!”

The second:

An old philosopher goes to see the doctor and says, “Doc, I’ve got a question you can probably help me with. When I was a young man in my twenties I used to get an erection once in a while and I’d grab it with both hands; I couldn’t bend it. Then later on in my forties I would get a hard-on and I’d grab it with both hands and I couldn’t bend it. Now, doc, I’m in my seventies and you know – the other day I was surprised! I got a hard-on and I grabbed it with both hands and I could bend it. Now, doc, does this mean I’m getting stronger?”

And the third:

An American tourist’s pretty wife said she didn’t feel well and went to consult a well-known French doctor. Worried, the American followed her to the doctor’s office to make sure everything was all right. To his anger and dismay, when he got there, he found her in bed with the doctor.
“What in hell do you think you’re doing?” he raged.
Said the foxy Frenchman, “Do not excite yourself, my friend. I am merely taking the lady’s temperature.”
“Okay, doc,” said the burly American, doubling his big fists. “But that thing better have numbers on it when you take it out!”

Enough for today.

============================================================

The first question:
Osho,
What is the difference between longing for the divine and loving another?
There is no difference at all – all desires are the same. You can desire money, you can desire meditation; you can long for power, you can long for godliness, but you remain the same. What you long for cannot change you. The object of longing has no effect on your inner being; it is the same game played again with new words, with new objects of desire.
You long for a person, you desire a person. Why? – because you are feeling lonely. You don’t feel sufficient in yourself. There is a kind of emptiness in you which you would like to be filled by the presence of the other. You feel meaningless and you want the other to impart meaning to your life. It never happens; it is only a longing and a hope. It is never fulfilled – in the very nature of things, it cannot be fulfilled. It is impossible because the other is desiring you for the same reason: he is also feeling empty. Now two empty persons are hoping to be fulfilled through each other; two meaningless lives are hoping to become meaningful and significant, from each other.
This is the utmost absurdity. Sooner or later one becomes aware of the phenomenon because again and again there is frustration; again and again there is failure; again and again the hope evaporates and you are left in a far deeper mess than you were ever in before. Again and again you are disillusioned.
It is because of this that Jean-Paul Sartre used to say: “The other is hell.” He is unconsciously groping in the dark and has unknowingly stumbled upon a fact, although the way he expresses it is not exactly what it should be. The other is not hell, your desire for the other is hell – that’s what all the buddhas have said down the ages – not the other. When Sartre says, “The other is hell,” it seems as if the other is responsible for your misery, disappointment, disillusionment. The other is not responsible, it is your own expectation that has been shattered. The greater the expectation, the more will be the frustration.
Hence, wherever arranged marriages have disappeared and love marriages have become prevalent, there is more frustration. In an arranged marriage your expectations are not very big. It is not a romantic affair at all; you are not hoping to reach to paradise through it. It is a mundane phenomenon, arranged by your parents, grandparents; arranged by the society, the family, the priest, the astrologer – arranged by others. Your dreams are not very involved in it. Hence, the arranged marriage moves on far smoother ground; it has no peaks, no ups and no downs. It is just like a plain superhighway – not even an Indian one, but a German superhighway. Nothing grows on it, it is dead; made of asphalt or tarmac or cement – utterly dead, but safe. It is not a hilly track. You are not moving in the unknown. You can have a map with milestones everywhere and pointers indicating where you are; where you are moving; how long the destination is; how far the destination is; how far you have moved from your place. Everything is clear – that’s how the arranged marriage functions.
If the arranged marriage happens when you are just a small child, with no idea of love, sex, romance, then you start taking your wife or husband for granted; just as you take your brothers and sisters for granted. Nobody ever thinks of changing one’s mother. If the marriage happens when you are a child, a small child, then you never think of divorce. You grow together; the husband and the wife grow together just as brothers and sisters grow together. They have lived together so long – as long as they can remember.
When my mother was married she was only seven years old. My father was not more than twelve years old. Now what dreams are possible? What can they hope for? In fact, they enjoyed the whole show of marriage, they were enchanted: the music, the bands and all kinds of fireworks. It was a really enjoyable experience – with no idea of what they were getting into. By the time they became aware, they were already rooted; they had become indispensable to each other.
But in a love marriage, it is going to be difficult. In America, out of two marriages, one is going to be shattered. That is the proportion of divorce: one divorce out of two marriages. And remember, the one marriage that has not shattered is not moving in a joyous world; it is not moving. It is simply because of cowardice, security, safety that people go on clinging. As they become more courageous, the divorce rate is going to become higher and higher, it is going to become bigger and bigger.
Why do love marriages fail? – for the simple reason that there is a deep expectation which cannot be fulfilled. Soon, you realize that you have been a fool. Soon, even before the honeymoon is over, the marriage is over. It may linger on… It depends how much courage you have. If you are a coward, it may linger on for the whole of your life. If you are courageous and can see the point, you may divorce immediately after your honeymoon is over because the marriage will also be over. You will have seen that all those illusions that you were carrying were just illusions. You were living in a world of rainbows, you were living in a world of poetry, not of reality.
Sartre is not right when he says that the other is hell, but in an unconscious way he has come very close to the truth. The buddhas say: “Not the other, but the desire for the other is hell.” To make the other responsible is a very common characteristic of human beings. One of Murphy’s maxims says: “To err is human and to blame the other for it is even far more human.”
That’s what Sartre has done: you have erred, now you are blaming the other. If you really see the point, then the desire is the cause; if you don’t see that, you will change the other. This other is causing you problems – change him or her. So after one divorce, another marriage and then another marriage and another marriage. It is the same illusion that you live again and again. People are so unintelligent, so unaware that they never see the point: that you can go on changing the whole world, you can change partner again and again… It will remain the same story because you are the same. Wherever you go you will remain the same; your heart is in the same state. There is confusion, there is no light inside you, there is total darkness.
When one becomes so fed up with ordinary relationships with people, one starts imagining a relationship with God; that is the longing for the divine. Now God is a little better in the sense that firstly, you can never be disappointed because you will never meet him; secondly, for the simple reason that there is going to be no honeymoon, the honeymoon can never be over. And thirdly, for the simple reason that there is not going to be any living together with God, so you can go on hoping. Now you are alone; it is a monologue, it is not a dialogue.
All human relationships fail because the other is there and you start clashing with each other; you start dominating each other; you start being jealous of each other; you start being possessive of each other. You are afraid that you may lose the other. One day, you see that there is nothing to lose – the other is as empty as you are. One dream is shattered, then dream another dream…
That is the beauty of the religious dream: you can go on dreaming, it can’t be shattered. The relationship with God can never be on the rocks – it is impossible because you are simply alone. When you are praying, what are you doing? – talking to yourself! It is like whistling in the dark – there is nobody to listen.
God is not a person with whom you can have any kind of relationship. God is not somebody in particular whom you can address, whom you can long for. But all your frustrations, all your relationships that have failed, have not made you alert enough yet – that it is better to drop the whole idea of desiring the other. Now you are trying to desire something which you are never going to get. One thing is good about it: you can go on hoping for lives. There is never going to be any end to it; the journey is unending. The other does not exist at all; now you are living in pure dreams. First, you were living in dreams but the other was there, so between the two realities the dreams were bound to be crushed – and they were crushed. But now there is nobody else, you are alone. You can make your god the way you want.
In India, people worship God in such ways that one feels sorry for them. Once I was staying with a woman; she was a great lover of Krishna. So much so, that she had stopped sleeping with her husband – how can you love two people? That is a betrayal. She believed that her true husband was Krishna. Her poor husband was really in a very mad state. He could not say that she was wrong because he was also brought up in the same Krishna-ite tradition. He could not say it, although he was well educated, a doctor. In India, education makes no difference to people, not at all. Their conditioning is so old, so ancient, so deep-rooted that education remains just on the surface. Scratch any educated Indian and inside you will find the whole rotten past. So intellectually he knew that his wife was crazy, but only intellectually. Deep down, he himself was afraid that she might be right because Meera used to think the same way. She left her own husband, thinking that Krishna was her true husband.
At least this woman had not left her husband, she had simply stopped sleeping with him. She used to sleep in another room; she would lock the room from the inside. She would sleep with Krishna’s statue.
When I stayed in their home, I watched the whole game. In the morning she would sing songs to wake up Krishna. Now Krishna needs to wake you up! But she would sing songs to wake Krishna up. When Krishna had got up, then the whole morning’s routine: he would take a bath, he would be given a bath, then breakfast… The whole day was devoted to Krishna. And just a silver statue – there was nobody there! But she used to talk to Krishna. If you could have seen her you would have been impressed because she would cry tears of joy and dance in utter ecstasy – at least on the surface it would look like that.
The more repressive she became about her sex – because she was not having any sexual relationship with the husband – the more and more obsessed she became with Krishna. She started dreaming that Krishna was making love to her in the night. Once she even got falsely pregnant – just hot air in her belly and nothing else.
When I talked to her… It was really cruel of me, but I am a cruel man – I have to be. I had originally gone for only three days; I stayed for seven, just to bring her to her senses. Finally she understood the point – she was an intelligent woman. She presented the statue to me and said, “Now you take it away, otherwise I can again get entangled in this stupidity. I have wasted my whole life. I can see the point that I am just living in my own dream. There is no Krishna, nobody comes to make love to me, it is all my own dream. It is just sexual repression.” And this whole nonsense of waking him up and giving him a bath, then breakfast and lunch; then Krishna retires for his afternoon sleep, then the tea – and everything, as if she was serving a real person.
The statue remained with me for many days; I think I have given it to Mukta. Mukta must have it even now. But the woman was freed, freed from that stupid monologue.
It is madness. It is the same madness, even a little worse because when you love a real person there is at least somebody real, good or bad, frustrating or not frustrating. But when you start longing for the divine it is simply living absolutely in the abstract.
You ask me: “What is the difference between longing for the divine and loving another?” There is no difference at all – longing is longing. Then what do I suggest? – try to understand the nature of longing, the nature of desire. When you understand the nature of desire, in that very understanding the desiring disappears. You start enjoying your aloneness, you become utterly joyous with yourself. There is no need for the other, there is no dependence on the other.
I am not saying that you will not be able to love then. In fact, you will be able to love then and only then, because love will have a totally different quality – the quality of sharing. You will not be a beggar, you will be an emperor. You will love because you have something to give, not something to get. You will love because you are overflowing with joy and you would like to share it with people. But then it will not be a relationship at all.
I call it relating. You can relate, but there is no need to create any bondage, there is no need to create any marriage. You can relate with somebody, you can relate to the same person your whole life, but tomorrow remains open, it is not closed. Tomorrow is not settled today, you cannot take it for granted. Tomorrow you may feel like sharing with the same person; the same person may like sharing or may not like sharing. Even if one of the two decides not to share, then you say good-bye to each other with great gratitude because one is grateful for all that joy and all that has happened before and all that has transpired before. With no grudge, complaint, quarrel, you simply depart. You know, “Our ways are parting now, we may not meet again.” You depart with a song in the heart, with a smile on the lips; with a hug, with a kiss you depart. You depart in deep friendliness. It is not a divorce because there has not been any marriage in the first place. You were not bound to each other so you are not getting free from each other. You had always been free, you had always remained individuals.
Two individuals relating remain individuals; two individuals getting into a relationship lose their individuality. They become a couple and to be a couple is an ugly thing. That means you have lost your freedom, you are no longer yourself; the other is also no longer himself or herself. Both have lost their freedom and nobody has gained anything out of it.
That’s why Sartre says, “The other is hell.” But still I would like to remind you that it is not the other, it is the desire for the other. When you have understood the futility of desire, the utter stupidity of desire, you relate in a totally different way; a qualitative change happens to you. You are happy with yourself; you are not seeking happiness through the other. You are so happy that you would like to share it with somebody, that’s why you relate.
Relationship originates in misery, relating originates in bliss.
When you start relating with people, you also start relating with existence. That’s what true religion is: relating with existence. It is not a longing for God. You can call existence God, there is no problem in it, but it is better to call it existence. Once you call it God, all the old associations with the word creep in and you start thinking of an old man sitting somewhere above in the sky on a golden throne looking at you, watching you; then strange ideas happen out of it.
Carl Gustav Jung remembers in his memoirs that for the whole of his childhood he was obsessed with only one idea: that if God sits above and sometimes he pisses, then? Or shits, then? His father was a priest, so he used to ask his father and his father would get very angry. He would say, “Stop! Never ask me such questions!” So he had to repress those questions. The more he repressed them, the more they were there. He was continuously obsessed with the idea: “What happens then?” He must be eating, he must be drinking and sitting above the head, anytime… He started dreaming that God was urinating and it was falling all over the earth and his shit was falling all over the earth. He himself became very guilty, “What am I…?” See! If you think of him above, this is what is going to happen – any moment! Stupid questions arise; they are bound to come out of a stupid idea.
God is not a person at all, God is a quality – godliness, not God. Existence is full of godliness. When you are capable of feeling joyous, fulfilled, contented, then meditating on desires and seeing the futility of them, they disappear and you are left without any desires at all.
Suddenly a great peace descends on you. In that peace your self-nature starts exploding. That is bliss. That bliss radiates as love; it reaches to people, to trees, to animals; it reaches to the clouds and the stars. Finally, it starts reaching to the whole existence. That’s what relating to existence is. You see the sunset and in the very sunset you see God – not Jesus crucified or Krishna playing on his flute; those are all childish ideas. You see godliness.
Have you ever observed a beautiful sunset? What more godliness can there be? You see a roseflower – what more godliness can there be? Or just grass leaves swaying in the wind… All this green, red, gold. This whole existence is so full, so over-full; overflowing with silence, with peace, joy, ecstasy. When you are able to be silent, peaceful, joyous, you start relating with it. That relating is religion.
Religion is not a desire for God, it is an experience of godliness. The question is not how to find God, the question is how to drop desiring. It has to be remembered, very emphatically remembered that if you start seeking and searching for God you will remain the same person, you will never change. If you start trying to understand the nature of desire, you are bound to go through a radical revolution because anybody who is a little bit intelligent is bound to see the utter futility of desire – it leads nowhere. The moment desire disappears from your being you have arrived.
You have always been there; it was only desire that was distracting you. Sometimes the desire was for money, sometimes for God; sometimes for power, prestige; sometimes for heaven, paradise. But any desire is enough to distract you from your nature. When there is no desire, where can you go? All desires lead you away from yourself. When there is no desire you are simply centered in your being. That very centeredness is bliss, ecstasy, samadhi, nirvana.

The second question:
Osho,
Why are people constantly pouring scorn on you?
It is absolutely natural. If they were not pouring scorn on me, that would have been very unnatural. This is expected, this is how it should be. This is how people have always behaved. People are very predictable, they function like machines. They go on functioning in the same way; their consciousness has not changed at all. Although they are Christians, Hindus, Mohammedans, Jainas, Buddhists, these are only words; deep down they are as unconscious as ever. It makes no difference to them what philosophy they believe in, it is only a belief – convenient, comfortable, consolatory – a kind of solace but not a transformation. They don’t want any transformation at all, they are afraid of it. Hence, whenever there is a person with whom transformation is possible, they naturally behave in a very antagonistic way.
Yoka says:
Some men pour scorn on Zen or hold it in question. They play with fire, trying in vain to burn the sky. A true student of Zen should hear what they say as if their words were sweet drops of dew, forgetting even their sweetness however when he enters into the realm of the non-mental.
I consider hurtful words as virtuous actions. And I treat those who hurt me as good masters, for I feel neither for nor against the man who insults me.
I do not need to explain the two powers of perseverance, the understanding of without-birth and without-death, suchness, nirvana….

The Buddhas, as numberless as the sands of the Ganges, all bear witness to this fact.
Once you have known yourself, nothing disturbs you, no insult can insult you. The people who go on pouring scorn on me will burn their own fingers, they will suffer because what they are doing and what they are saying is absolutely untrue. But we cannot expect truth from them – they don’t know what truth is.
But you need not be worried about them – they are lying. Everybody lies, but it does not matter since nobody listens. And remember, a man like me is bound to be punished. Virtue is its own punishment. Virtuous actions will never go unpunished, otherwise why was Jesus crucified? Why was Socrates poisoned? Why was Mansoor murdered? Virtuous actions will never go unpunished. Why? – for the simple reason that a man like Socrates is a danger to the society, which is rooted in lies. A man of truth is dangerous to all those who are living in lies. A man with eyes, living with people who are blind, cannot be tolerated because it is this man who has eyes who makes the blind people feel that they are blind. If he were not there they would have never felt themselves as blind. Now his presence hurts them; his very presence shows them that something is wrong with them. And of course, there are millions of them and how can millions be wrong? Obviously this man must be wrong; the crowds cannot be wrong. The crowds have to defend themselves.
Pouring scorn on me is nothing but sheer self-defense, but it is a good sign. A good sign in the sense that they have become aware that I am here; that I am a danger to them and to their society and to their structures; to their minds, to their philosophies and ideologies. Now they will find every possible way to detract people from coming to me, to prevent people from reaching me. They will do all that they can do.
But truth, even if crucified, becomes victorious; lies, even if crowned, are bound to be defeated. That is the ultimate law. Buddha says: “Aes dhammo sanantano, this is the eternal law of existence.” So let them do what they want to do. Don’t be worried about what they say; in fact, be happy that they have started taking note of me. The only thing that can be bad is if they ignore me.
Just think, if they had ignored Jesus, if they had behaved as if he never existed, he would have died by himself; there would have been no need to crucify him. He may have lived a few more years, but he was bound to die. If they had ignored him there would have been no Christianity. Christianity exists because they could not ignore Jesus.
If they had ignored Socrates, you would have never have heard the name Socrates. Now we don’t know who were the people who insulted him, who were the people who gathered together to kill this beautiful man. But Socrates has become immortal, his message has become immortal; his message still resounds and wherever someone is searching for truth, he is bound to feel tremendous respect for Socrates. No country, no race, can prevent Socrates from penetrating the heart of a true seeker. If they had ignored this man – he was already very old when they poisoned him – he would not have survived more than another five to ten years at the most.
What wrong could he have done in five, ten years? But they could not ignore him; it is good that they became very antagonistic. They created so much fuss about this single individual with no power, that twenty-five centuries have passed, thousands of powerful people have been born, but nobody has that power over seekers of truth that Socrates has.
The same is true about Buddha; they could not tolerate his existence. Many attempts were made on his life. They could not succeed in killing him – that is another matter – but they tried their best. Now, nobody knows who those people were – they must have been just like people you come across everywhere; the crowds, the mob. But Buddha became the greatest star in the whole history of human consciousness. Nobody shines so brilliantly as he. If they had ignored him we would have missed, we would have missed something of tremendous value.
So don’t be worried what people say about me. Be happy that they are becoming interested. And not only in this country, all over the world…
A bishop in England has written to one of my sannyasins who is also a priest – he is a chaplain at the University of Cambridge. The bishop has written to him: “We have heard that you have also become involved with this dangerous man and this is not right for a Christian priest. Please explain.” Our sannyasin – Chinmaya is his name – has written a beautiful letter to the bishop saying: “Listening to this man I became convinced that Jesus was a reality. Coming closer to this man, for the first time I became aware that Jesus is not a myth.” Now, from a chaplain at Cambridge University, an important person… The bishop must be feeling very disturbed. “What to do with this man?” And now Dynamic Meditation is being held in his church in Cambridge!
The Protestant Church of Germany has circulated an order to all its churches in Germany that my name should not be mentioned in any church. No books, no quotations should be used. That simply shows that they must be being used, people must be quoting me, otherwise why should they get worried? A committee was appointed to investigate. Just the other day the West German government published a pamphlet to make people aware of the danger, particularly for young people. The pamphlet says: “Although this man says that you need not leave the marketplace, you need not renounce your home or your job, still people become so magnetized that they do leave their jobs. And so many people are missing from Germany that it is not a small problem. It is taking on epidemic proportions.”
When a government becomes worried – and a faraway government… Seminars are being arranged all over the world, for and against me. I don’t even go outside my room, but they cannot even ignore a man who just lives in his room, who never goes outside. I have even stopped walking in the garden – it may be objectionable to somebody! But this is, in a way, a good sign.
Jesus was only criticized in the small vicinity where he lived. Buddha was criticized only in the small province where he moved around, Bihar. The name comes from his movement. The word bihar means, where Buddha moved. So just in that small province he was criticized. I may be the first man who is being criticized all over the world; irrespective of race, country, religion. But all are agreed about one thing: “This man is dangerous!” This is really something to make one happy. You should rejoice – something great is going to happen out of it. If the criticism of Buddha in only a small province created so much energy, if the criticism of Jesus in a small area around Jerusalem created such an impact on history, then there is great promise.
The criticism of me around the world is going to affect the whole of humanity, the whole future of humanity. Right now you cannot visualize it because right now you are in the very birth pains of the whole process. The followers of Jesus could have never conceived… When he was being crucified they escaped. There were not many followers, only twelve apostles and not more than one hundred people who were deeply devoted to him; not more than one thousand people who were in some way related to him. Everybody was against him. Who would have conceived that this carpenter’s son who was being crucified in such a humiliating way, with a thief on either side, just like an ordinary criminal, would have such an impact on history? And that history would be divided with his name; that his name would become a demarcation line: “Before Christ” and “After Christ”? Who would have conceived it? It would have been impossible.
You cannot conceive what is happening right now, but I can see. All these things are good tidings. Don’t be worried. Continue in your way, go on living in your suchness, go on living in your meditation, in your celebration. That is the only message that I have given to you: celebrate life, rejoice in life. Don’t be bothered about what others say; that is their business.

The third question:
Osho,
Sometimes I do not know whether I am stupid or just mad. What is the difference between stupidity and madness?
You can’t be stupid because the stupid person cannot ask such a question. The stupid person cannot ask any question at all. The stupid person has no curiosity, has no inquiry. He does not live, he vegetates.
This question which is arising in you, “What is the difference between stupidity and madness?” shows a clear sign of intelligence.
You are certainly not mad either because a mad person never thinks that he is mad. That is one of the essential qualities of madness, that a mad person never thinks that he is mad; he thinks the whole world is mad except him. The moment the mad person starts inquiring, questioning, “Am I mad?” it is a good sign. That shows that some sanity is happening, that he is coming back to his senses. To know “I am mad” is to be free of madness.
You can go to any madhouse, ask people; they don’t think that they are mad.

Kahlil Gibran remembers one of his friends who went nuts and was put in a mental asylum. Gibran went to see him. He was sitting underneath a tree enjoying himself, singing a song; he was very happy. Gibran sat by his side and said to him, “You must be feeling worried that you have been put inside these walls?”
The man said, “What are you talking about? Sorry? Sad? Why should I feel sorry and sad? In fact, I am feeling very happy. These walls are not around me, these walls are around all the mad people of the world. Only a very few, sane people live here. We have left all the insane outside. Since I have come in, I have come across such intelligent people, such beautiful people. Outside everybody is ugly.”

Naturally, because everybody was telling him, “You are mad”; now nobody there is telling him he is mad. In fact, everybody is enjoying each other’s madness, accepting it. It’s perfectly okay, there is no problem with it.
You are neither stupid – otherwise the question could not arise – nor are you mad; you are only asleep. That is far more dangerous because a madman can be cured and a stupid man can be helped to become intelligent, but the man who is asleep and is dreaming is really in bad shape. If you try to wake him up he becomes angry – you are disturbing his dreams. He has invested so much in his dreams; he is seeing such great dreams and you are disturbing him.
Now, to tell any president that all power is just a childish desire, is to shatter his dream. To tell a rich man that money is nothing but an effort to stuff yourself somehow with things, with junk, so that you can feel that you are not empty… He will become angry with you. To say to people: “Whatever you are doing in your life is nothing but playing with toys” will drive them crazy and against you; they will jump on you. How dare you call their lives just a sleep? That’s why they cannot forgive the buddhas.
But you are my sannyasin and you have to forgive me. There is no problem, you are only asleep. All that is needed is a clear-cut awareness, consciousness, wakefulness and watchfulness that can bring you out of your sleep. But if you want to remain in your sleep, nobody can pull you out; it is impossible. Only you can bring yourself out of your sleep. Madness can be cured by others, but not sleep. Stupidity can be cured, it can be helped because no child is born really stupid.
Every child learns stupidity from the stupid people all around. He imitates – he has to imitate. If you have to live with stupid people you have to behave like them, otherwise you start falling out of line, separate from them. They want you to be part of the collective mind; they don’t like individuals. So everybody has to become stupid in some way or other – Catholic stupid or Protestant stupid, Hindu stupid or Mohammedan stupid, but you have to become some kind of stupid. Maybe a communist stupid, an atheist stupid, but you have to bring yourself to some kind of stupidity so that you can belong to a crowd.
But there is a clear-cut difference between madness and stupidity. Mad people are the ones who are really more sensitive than others, that’s why they go mad. They are more intelligent than others, that’s why they go mad. They are so intelligent that they cannot cope with all the stupid masses around; they are so intelligent that they cannot force themselves to behave stupidly. They start functioning like individuals and that creates trouble. They are so intelligent that they can see the futility of many projects that have been imposed upon you.
You have been taught to be ambitious. An intelligent person can immediately see that it is nonsense – it can never give you any joy. Yes, it will destroy many other people’s lives – it is violent, it is ugly, it is destructive – and it is not going to give you anything in return.
The ambitious person is a stupid person. The intelligent person is not ambitious, he simply lives with no hankering to compete with others because he knows everybody is unique. There is no question of competition. He never compares. The really intelligent person never compares himself with anybody. He never thinks himself higher or lower. He never suffers from a superiority complex or an inferiority complex – which are two sides of the same coin. He simply knows, “I am who I am and you are who you are,” and there is no question of comparison. How can you compare a rose with a lotus? All comparison will be wrong from the very beginning. Each individual has such a beauty, such a unique beauty, that no comparison is possible.
What is the point of becoming ambitious? Ambition means: “I have to be superior; I have to prove myself, I am superior to others.” Now for this you have to lose your intelligence, you have to become stupid. That’s why politicians are utterly stupid people, they can’t be otherwise. They are all bananas – and rotten bananas at that!

A man was driving along an outer suburban road. He was just passing a hospital for the mentally insane when his car had a flat tire.
He got out of his car, got his tools out of the trunk, undid the wheel-nuts and put them in the hubcap in the gutter beside him. Just then there was a burst of thunder and torrents of rain started to fall. In his hurry to change the wheel he knocked over the hubcap and the wheel-nuts were washed down a drain just near him.
Now he was in trouble, but after puzzling for ten minutes or so he heard someone calling him. Looking up, he saw a head poking up over the top of the high wall opposite him. This guy had been watching all that was going on and said, “Why don’t you take one nut off each of the other wheels and put the wheel back on and drive to the next garage where you can get some more?”
The driver was pleased and did what had been suggested to him. Then looking over to this man on the wall he said, “Hey, what are you doing inside that place? You’re supposed to be mad!”
The guy on the wall yelled back, “Maybe we are mad in here, but we’re not stupid!”

A very sensitive person in this stupid world is bound to become mad. He has to learn the art of meditation… Otherwise he is bound to become mad. Only meditation can save him from becoming mad.
Now even psychologists are becoming aware of the phenomenon that mad people are very sensitive and vulnerable people – intelligent people – who cannot cope with the reality that surrounds them. It is too much and they are too fragile for it. They break down under its weight. If they can be helped through meditation their breakdowns can become breakthroughs.
Meditation is the only hope, otherwise as people become more intelligent, more and more of them will go mad. And that is happening.
In backward countries fewer people go mad; in advanced countries more people go mad. Why? For example, in a country like India, utterly poor, dying of starvation, illness, disease, not so many people go mad as they do in America. The Hindu swamis and the Hindu mahatmas brag about it. They go on talking all around the world – the Muktanandas and Maharishi Mahesh Yogis, etcetera – and they go on bragging: “Why don’t Indians go mad? – for the simple reason that they are religious people.” It is not so; the fact is something else, something totally different. The fact is that because India is undernourished it doesn’t have that much intelligence with which to go mad.
The Indian mind is undernourished. How many Nobel Prizes does India get? Such a vast country, one-sixth of the whole globe! Out of six people, one is an Indian; one out of six Nobel Prizes should go to India, but how many Nobel Prizes…? Why isn’t it happening? Why can’t Indians be great discoverers? – for the simple reason that their bodies are undernourished; they are lacking the essential ingredients that make intelligence bloom. Intelligence does not grow on an empty stomach. If you want beautiful roses and big roses, you have to have a rich soil. You have to give them fertilizers and manure; you have to take care of them. But in India people are undernourished; what they eat is not sufficient. It does not provide the right vitamins, the right proteins, the right amount of chemicals to their brains. Hence, all they can do is stand on their heads and do yoga postures. That does not need any intelligence. All they can do is repeat scriptures that are thousands of years old, like parrots; which are really irrelevant.
One sannyasin has written that he was in New York and Muktananda was answering questions. All the answers were absolutely patent answers which one can find in the Gita, which one can find in any Hindu book. There was only one question that the Gita had no answer for and the Vedas had no reference to – they cannot have. The question was: “What do you think about Osho and his Tantra?” Now his mind must have ceased completely. My name functions like a sword. The answer was: “We are doing research on this matter. When the research is complete we will answer.”
These are the “enlightened” people. These are the people who go on trotting around the world initiating people. They are doing research on Tantra, on me. The simple reason why he could not answer is because no patent answer is available. He goes on asking people about me; that’s what he calls “research.”
Nirgrantha has arrived. Muktananda saw Nirgrantha walking on the beach in Miami. He called out to him – he must have seen the mala and the locket – and wanted him to stay with him. Nirgrantha stayed there for two days and there were long interrogations, three-hour-long interrogations: “Has Osho said this against me?” Nirgrantha said, “They are all openly said things, they are all published. You need not inquire of me, you can just look in the books.” This is the research work that is going on!
They don’t have intelligence, they don’t even have guts, but they go on telling the whole world that Indians don’t go mad; that Indians don’t commit so many suicides because they are religious. They are not religious – not at all. They are not mad because to go mad, first you need intelligence. Have you ever heard of any stupid person going mad? That’s impossible. Have you ever heard of any idiot going mad? How can an idiot go mad? To go mad you need some intelligence in the first place; to lose it you have to have it!
Only very intelligent people can commit suicide – and these are the same people who can become sannyasins. The same people who can commit suicide can become sannyasins; for the simple reason that they have seen that this life is useless. Now either they have to find another life, another way of living, or it is pointless to continue. They have courage enough, guts enough.
It does not need much intelligence to see that this life is really futile.
Murphy says: “If the shoe fits, it is ugly. If you like it, they don’t have it in your size. If you like it and it is in your size, it doesn’t fit anyway. If you like it and it fits, you can’t afford it. If you like it, it fits and you can afford it, it falls apart the first time you wear it.”
Just a little intelligence and you will be able to see that’s what life is. Then if you have guts, either you commit suicide and simply say to existence, “Enough is enough!” Or you transform your being – you become a sannyasin.
Many people ask me, “Why aren’t Indians coming to you?” – because they are not religious people, they are not intelligent. They don’t have guts and they don’t yet have the intelligence to see that life is futile – although they go on repeating like parrots that life is futile; that life is illusion; that it is all maya. But it is just a way of talking. Just as the English talk about the weather, Indians talk about metaphysics. Neither do the English mean anything…

An Englishman was leaving a town where he had gone to visit some friends. His horse, who was pulling his cart, suddenly said, “It is too hot.”
The Englishman could not believe his ears. There was nobody else there, just his dog sitting in the cart, so he said to the dog, “Did you hear that?” He had to say it to somebody! “Did you hear that?”
The dog said, “I have heard it many times. Everybody talks about the weather and nobody does anything about it!”

So English horses and dogs also talk about the weather. Indian horses and dogs talk about metaphysics, god-realization; they recite the Gita and the Vedas. But you don’t see any intelligence, you don’t see any brilliance; you don’t see any light in their eyes, you don’t see any response to reality.
It is better to be mad than to be stupid. But ordinarily people are not mad, they are just on the verge of going mad at any moment. If you don’t turn your energies to meditation, you will go mad.
The difference between you and the mad people is only one of degree, remember. Maybe you are at ninety-nine degrees and the madman has crossed the boundary of one hundred degrees. Any small incident, any accident, can push you one degree more. Your wife runs off with somebody and that’s enough. Your business fails, the bank goes bankrupt, the government nationalizes – anything; just one degree and you can be mad at any moment. But remember, it is better to be mad than to be stupid.
There is no need to be mad. Why not meditate? I have created so many mad kinds of meditations that you can be both together – mad and meditators. Slowly, slowly meditation is bound to win over.

Sujata has asked, “Osho, I have three questions to ask you. The first question: How did you discover Kundalini meditation?” – simple, Sujata: Meditating down by the river upon a hill of red ants!
The second: “And Dynamic?” That is even more simple, Sujata; it was almost impossible not to discover it. I came upon it driving on Indian roads in Indian cars!
The third: “And what about Nadabrahma?” Hm!

And the last question:
Osho,
Why am I afraid of you?
It is a good sign. It means something is on the way. You become afraid of me only when you start coming closer to me; it is natural. To be close to a master is to be close to a certain kind of death. Only stupid people are not afraid because they can’t see what is going to happen – that I am taking you slowly, slowly to the cliff. And once you are there and enjoying a joke, I will push you!

Sitting in an armchair at his club, a retired British colonial army officer was recounting one of his heroic adventures to a young captain.
“There I was, me boy, stalking through the jungle, when out jumps this enormous great tiger right in front of me.”
“Gosh, golly, sir, what happened?”
“It stood there and went ‘Roar!’”
“Gosh, golly, sir, what happened next?”
“I fouled me breeches.”
“Great Scot! That must have been incapacitating – what happened next?”
“No, no, no,” stuttered the old colonel, “I fouled me breeches.”
“Yes?” said the young captain, watching the old man evidently in some discomfort.
“No, no, no, I fouled me breeches when I went ‘Roar!’”

Get it?
Enough for today.

============================================================

The first question:
Osho,
How is it possible that Gurdjieff needed another head, an Ouspensky, to work on a third psychology – the psychology of the buddhas – while you work by yourself and can be both in the state of mind and no-mind?
There have been two kinds of masters in the world. The first kind, has always needed somebody else to express, to interpret, to philosophize, to communicate what the master has experienced. Gurdjieff is not alone in that; he needed P. D. Ouspensky. Without Ouspensky he would not have been known at all. Ramakrishna comes in the same category; he needed a Vivekananda. Without Vivekananda, Ramakrishna would have remained absolutely unheard-of.
This has been the case with many masters, for the simple reason that their whole work concerned the heart center. They became crystallized in the heart center – so much so that it was impossible for them to move to the head and to use their own head. It appeared far easier for them to use somebody else’s head rather than their own.
But there was a difficulty in it. One thing was good about it: the master himself was not constantly moving between two extremes; from mind to no-mind, from no-mind to mind. There was no movement in his being; he was absolutely crystallized. But there was another kind of trouble: the man who was being used as a medium – Ouspensky, Vivekananda, or others – was himself not an enlightened person. Gurdjieff could use Ouspensky’s head, but not exactly the way he would have liked to. Ouspensky’s own mind was bound to color Gurdjieff’s experience; he was bound to bring his own prejudices, his own philosophy, his own understanding to it. He had no experience of his own, he was simply a medium. But the medium is not just an empty vehicle. He has his own mind and anything passing through his mind is going to be changed a little bit here, a little bit there.
Ouspensky introduced Gurdjieff to the world, but he introduced Gurdjieff in his own way. One cannot blame Ouspensky. What could he do? He tried his best. I think he was one of the best interpreters that any master has ever been able to find. But still an interpreter is an interpreter. It can’t be the same; it is impossible to be the same. Hence, sooner or later they had to part from each other.
In the last days of Ouspensky’s life, he became almost an enemy to Gurdjieff. He started saying, “Now Gurdjieff has gone mad. At first he was moving in the right direction, but the later Gurdjieff has gone astray.” He could not say that the whole of Gurdjieff’s teaching was wrong because his own teaching was based on Gurdjieff’s teaching. He divided Gurdjieff in two. The first part of Gurdjieff – when Ouspensky was with him – was right and the later part was wrong. In fact, the later part was the culmination of the first part.
Why did this happen? It was bound to happen because sooner or later Ouspensky’s own mind was going to become a barrier. When he first came to Gurdjieff he was absolutely surrendered to him – surrendered in the sense that he was fascinated by his personality, fascinated intellectually – because he was a great intellectual. Absolutely surrendered in the intellectual sense, not in the existential sense. If he had been existentially surrendered, he would have been of no use because Gurdjieff needed a head, he was in search of a head. He had many other followers who were devoted to him from their very innermost core, but they were not going to become his interpreters to the world.
When Ouspensky came to Gurdjieff, he was already a world-famous mathematician, a philosopher. His own book, Tertium Organum, had already been translated into almost all the great languages of the world. And that book, Tertium Organum, is really something tremendous; coming out of a man who was unenlightened, it is almost a miracle. Intellectually he managed something which nobody has ever been able to manage. He knew nothing, he had not experienced anything, but his intellectual grasp… His intellect was really sharp. He belongs to the topmost intellectuals of the whole history of humanity. There are very few competitors to rival him. Only once in a while…
Socrates had such a man, Plato. Socrates was the heart of the teaching, Plato was the head. In the case of Gurdjieff, exactly the same was repeated; Gurdjieff was the heart, Ouspensky became the head. If I have to choose between the two, my choice would be Ouspensky, not Plato. Ouspensky is simply unbelievable; his insight, without any self-realization, is so accurate that anybody who has not experienced will think that Ouspensky was a buddha, a christ. Only a buddha would be able to detect the flaws, otherwise not. The flaws are there, but ordinarily undetectable.
He started writing books on Gurdjieff. He wrote one of his greatest contributions: In Search of the Miraculous. And then wrote: The Fourth Way. These two books introduced Gurdjieff to the world; otherwise, he would have remained an absolutely unknown master. Maybe a few people would have come in personal contact with him and would have been benefited, but Ouspensky made him available to millions.
But as those books spread all over the world and thousands of people started moving toward Gurdjieff, Ouspensky became very egoistic – naturally because he was the cause of the whole thing. In fact, he started thinking: “Without me, what is Gurdjieff? Who is Gurdjieff without me? Who was he? When I met him he was just a refugee living in a refugee camp in Constantinople, almost starving. Nobody had ever heard of him. I have made him world famous; the whole credit goes to me.” This idea went to his head – it became too much for him. He started, in subtle ways, to dominate the movement. And you cannot dominate a man like Gurdjieff, you cannot dictate to a man like Gurdjieff. They had to part.
In the last days of his life, Ouspensky was so against Gurdjieff that he would not tolerate anybody mentioning Gurdjieff’s name to him; in his presence Gurdjieff’s name was not mentioned. Even in his books Gurdjieff’s name was reduced to only “G”; the full name disappeared. After the break just “G” remained – somebody anonymous: “‘G’ said…,” not “Gurdjieff.” And he made it clear, very clear: “We have parted and I have developed my own system.” He started gathering his own followers. Those followers were not allowed to read Gurdjieff’s books; those followers were not allowed to go and see Gurdjieff. While Ouspensky was alive he was very suspicious of anybody who wanted to go to Gurdjieff, or even wanted to study his books.
Gurdjieff was aware that this was going to happen. Still, there was no other way; a head had to be used. Gurdjieff’s work was such that he was absolutely crystallized in his heart; he could not move to the head.
So was the case with Ramakrishna. Vivekananda was an ordinary intellectual, not even of the caliber of Ouspensky, but he made Ramakrishna world famous. Ramakrishna died very early, that’s why Vivekananda and Ramakrishna never parted; otherwise the parting would have been absolutely certain. Ramakrishna died and Vivekananda became his whole and sole representative. He dominated all the followers, he dominated the whole movement. He became the representative of Ramakrishna for them. If Ramakrishna had lived, the same thing would have happened sooner or later because Vivekananda was just head and nothing else, nothing of the heart. Even if he talks about the heart, it is head-talk: the head talking about the heart – it is not heart-full. There is no love in it; there is no meditation in it; there is no prayer in it, just intellectual analysis. He knew the scriptures and he forced his ideas on Ramakrishna’s ideas. And Ramakrishna died so there was nobody to say no to it.
Vivekananda destroyed the whole beauty of Ramakrishna. But that was going to happen because Ramakrishna was not a man of the head at all.
But this has not always been the case. Buddha never depended on anybody else. He was capable of moving from mind to no-mind, from no-mind to mind; that is his greatness. That is a far greater achievement than that of Gurdjieff or Ramakrishna because their achievements are in a way limited. Buddha is very liquid. He is not solid like a rock, he is more fluid – like a river.
So was the case with Lao Tzu; he never depended on anybody else, he said whatever he had to say. He said it himself and as beautifully as it could be said. Their philosophies are bound to be far more pure because they come from the original man. They come from the original realization, from the very source; there is no via media. So is the case with Zarathustra, Jesus, Krishna, Mahavira.
This is the second category of masters. The first category is easier in a way; it is easy to be crystallized at one center. It is a far more complex process, a longer and far more arduous journey, to remain alive at both extremes. These are the two extremes: the head and the heart. But it is possible. It has happened before. It is happening right now in front of you.
I live in silence, but my work consists of much intellectual communication. I live in silence, but I have to use words. But when I use words, those words contain my silence. I don’t need anybody else to interpret me, hence there is a far greater possibility that whatever I am saying will remain pure for a longer period of time.
And now, since Buddha, many scientific developments have happened…
We don’t know what Buddha actually said; he never used anybody like Ouspensky, Plato or Vivekananda. He was his own interpreter. But when he died, a problem arose. He spoke for forty-two years – he became enlightened when he was about forty and then he lived to eighty-two. For forty-two years he was speaking morning, afternoon, evening. Now there were no scientific methods for recording what he was saying. When he died, the first question was how to collect it all. He had said so much – forty-two years is a long time and many had become enlightened in those forty-two years. Those who became enlightened had become crystallized in the heart because that is easier, simpler and people tend to move to the simplest process, to the shortcut. Why bother? If you can reach a point directly, straight, why go roundabout? When Buddha was alive there was no need for anybody else to interpret him; he was his own spokesman, so the need was never felt.
There were thousands of arhats and bodhisattvas; they gathered together. Only those who had become enlightened were called to the gathering – obviously, because they would not misinterpret Buddha. And that’s true, they could not misinterpret him – it was impossible for them. They had also experienced the same universe of the beyond, they had also moved to the farther shore.
But they all said: “Since we became enlightened we have never bothered much about his words. We have listened to him because his words were sweet. We have listened to him because his words were pure music. We have listened to him because just listening to him was a joy. We have listened to him because that was the only way to be close to him. Just to sit by his side and listen to him was a rejoicing; it was a benediction. But we did not bother about what he was saying; once we attained there was no need. We were not listening from the head and we were not collecting anything in our memory; our own heads and memories stopped functioning long ago.”
Somebody became enlightened thirty years before Buddha died. Now, for thirty years he sat by the side of Buddha listening as one listens to the wind passing through the pine trees; as one listens to the song of the birds; as one listens to the rain falling on the roof. They were not listening intellectually. So they said, “We have not carried any memory of it. Whatever he must have said was beautiful, but we cannot recollect what he said. Just to be with him was such a joy.”
It was very difficult now – how to collect his words? The only man who had lived continuously with Buddha for forty-two years was Ananda; he was his personal attendant, his caretaker. He had listened to him; almost every word that he had uttered was heard by Ananda. Even if he was talking to somebody privately, Ananda was present. Ananda was almost always present, like a shadow. He had heard everything – whatever had fallen from his lips. And he must have said many things to Ananda when there was nobody there. They must have talked on going to bed at night. Ananda used to sleep in the same room, just to take care of him – he may need something during the night. He may feel cold, he may feel hot; he may like the window to be opened or closed; he may feel thirsty and may need some water or something, or – he was getting old – he may feel sick. So Ananda was there continuously.
All of them agreed, “We should ask Ananda.” But there was a great problem: Ananda was not yet enlightened. He had heard everything that Buddha uttered publicly, uttered privately. They must have gossiped together; there was nobody else who could have said, “I am friendly with Buddha,” except Ananda. Ananda was also his cousin-brother and not only a cousin-brother, but two years older than Buddha. So when he came to be initiated, he asked for a few things before his initiation. In India the elder brother has to be respected just like your father. Even the elder cousin-brother has to be respected just like your father.
So Ananda said to Buddha, “Before I take initiation… Once I become your bhikku, your sannyasin, I will have to follow your orders, your commandments. Then whatever you say I will have to do. But before that I order you, as your elder brother, to grant me three things. Remember these three things. First: I will always be with you. You cannot say to me, ‘Ananda, go somewhere else, do something else.’ You cannot send me to some other village to preach, to convert people, to give your message. This is my first order to you. Second: I will be always present. Even if you are talking to somebody privately, I want to hear everything. Whatever you are going to say in your life, I want to be an audience to it. So you will not be able to say to me, ‘This is a private talk, go outside.’ I will not go, remember it! And thirdly: I am not very interested in becoming enlightened, I am much more interested in just being with you. So if enlightenment means separating from you, I don’t care a bit about it. Only if I can remain with you even after enlightenment, am I willing to be enlightened, otherwise forget about it.”
And Buddha nodded his yes to all these three orders – he had to, he was younger than Ananda – and he followed those three things his whole life.
The conference of the arhats and the bodhisattvas decided that only Ananda could relate Buddha’s words. And he had a beautiful memory; he had listened to everything very attentively. “But the problem is he is not yet enlightened; we cannot rely on him. His mind may play tricks, his mind may change things unconsciously. He may not do it deliberately, he may not do it consciously, but he still has a great unconscious in him. He may think he had heard that Buddha said this and he may never have said it. He may delete a few words, he may add a few words. Who knows? We don’t have any criterion because many things that he has heard, only he has heard; there is no other witness.”
Ananda was sitting outside the hall. The doors were closed and he was weeping outside on the steps. He was weeping because he was not allowed inside. An eighty-four-year-old man weeping like a child! The man who had lived for forty-two years with Buddha was not allowed in. Now he was really in anguish. Why had he not become enlightened? Why did he not insist on it? He made a vow, a decision: “I will not move from these steps until I become enlightened.” He closed his eyes, he forgot the whole world. And it is said that within twenty-four hours, without changing his posture, he became enlightened.
When he became enlightened he was allowed in. Then he related… All these scriptures were related by Ananda. But who knows? He became enlightened afterward. All those memories belong to the mind of an unenlightened person; even though he had become enlightened, those memories were not those of an enlightened person. It is not absolutely certain that what is reported is exactly what Buddha said.
But now science has given us all the technology. Each single word – not only the word but the pauses in between – the very nuances of the words, the way they are uttered, the very gestures, can all be recorded. The words can be recorded; the gestures can be photographed; films can be made, tapes can be made.
Now the best way for any enlightened person is not to depend on anybody else, although that path is difficult. It is far more difficult because you have to do two things together. You have to constantly shuttle back and forth, back and forth. You have to constantly go into wordlessness and come out from that emptiness into the world of words. It is a difficult phenomenon. The most difficult phenomenon in the whole of existence because when you enter into silence it is so beautiful that to come back to the universe of words looks absurd, meaningless. It is as if you have reached to the sunlit peaks and you come back to the dark holes where people live in the valley, the slums. When you have touched the sunlit peaks; when you can live there and can float like a cloud in the infinite sky, to come back to the muddy earth, to crawl again with people who are living in mud seems to be very absurd. But there is no other way. If you have enough compassion, you have to go into this difficult process.
It depends on many things too. It depends on the whole process by which a master has reached through many lives. Ramakrishna was never an intellectual in any of his lives. A simple man – in this life he was a simple man. Even if he had wanted to, it would have been impossible for him to become a Vivekananda too. It was easier to find somebody who could do that work.
When Gurdjieff was very young, only twelve years old, he became part of a group of seekers: thirty people who made a decision that they would go to the different parts of the world and find out whether truth was only talk or if there were a few people who had known it. Just a twelve-year-old boy, but he was chosen to join the party for the simple reason that he had great stamina, he had great power. One thing was certain about him: whatever he decided, he would risk all for it. He wouldn’t look back, he would never escape, even if he had to lose his life, he would lose his life. He was almost shot dead three times – but he pulled himself back into life somehow; the purpose was still unfulfilled.
Those thirty people traveled all over the world. They came to India, they went to Tibet and the whole Middle East; to all the Sufi monasteries and to all the Himalayan monasteries. They had decided to come back to a certain place in the Middle East and to relate whatever they had gained; after each twelve years they were going to meet. At the end of the first twelve years almost half of them did not return; they must have somehow died, or forgotten the mission, or become entangled somewhere. Somebody could have got married, fallen in love. A thousand and one things could have happened – people are accident-prone. Only fifteen people returned. After the next twelve years only three people came back. And after the third twelve year period, only Gurdjieff returned. All the others had disappeared. What happened to them nobody knows.
But this man had very great decisiveness; if he had made a decision, nothing was going to deter him. He was almost killed three times; the only thing that saved him was his mission, that he had to go back. He pulled himself out of his death. It needed great inner power.
He had no time to become an intellectual. He was moving with mystics – from one monastery to another; from one cave to another; from one country to another. He came to India, he went to Tibet and he went up to Japan; he gathered knowledge from all over the world. By the time he became enlightened there was no time left for him to intellectualize it, to put it into words. He knew the taste, but the words were not there. He needed a man like Ouspensky.
My own approach has been totally different. I began as an intellectual – not only in this life, but in many lives. My whole work in many lives has been concerned with the intellect – refining the intellect, sharpening the intellect. In this life I began as an atheist with an absolute denial of God. You cannot be an atheist if you are not supra-intellectual. And I was an absolute atheist. People used to avoid me because I was doubting each and every thing and my doubt was contagious. Even my teachers would avoid me…

One of my teachers was dying; I went to see him. He said, “Please… I am happy that you have come, but don’t say a single word because this is not the time. I am dying and I want to die believing that God is.”
I said, “You cannot die… Seeing me, the doubt has already arisen.”
He said, “What do you mean?”
And the thing started. Before he died, just after twelve hours, he died an atheist. I was so happy. I had to work continuously for twelve hours. Out of desperation he said, “Okay, let me die peacefully. I say that there is no God. Are you happy? Now leave me alone!”

My university professors were always in difficulties with me. I was expelled from one college, then another, and thrown out of one university. Finally, a university admitted me with the condition – I had to sign a written condition – that I would not ask any questions and I would not argue with the professors.
I said, “Okay.” I signed it and the vice-chancellor was very happy. I then said, “Now, a few things. What do you mean by ‘argument’?”
He said, “Here you go!”
I said, “I haven’t written that I wouldn’t ask for any clarification. I can ask for a clarification. What do you mean by an ‘argument’? If I cannot ask a question, what is the point of your whole department of philosophy? – all your philosophers ask questions. The whole of philosophy depends on doubt; doubt is the base of all philosophy. If I cannot doubt your stupid philosophers, your stupid professors, how am I going to learn philosophy?”
He said, “Look at what you’re saying! You are calling my professors stupid in front of me!”
I said, “They are stupid, otherwise why these conditions? Can you think of anybody being intelligent and asking his students not to question him? Is this a sign of intelligence? A professor will invite questions. An intelligent professor will be happy with a student who can argue well.”

That remained a problem. From the very beginning, my whole approach was not that of a Ramakrishna. I am not a devotional type, not at all. I have arrived at godliness through atheism, not through theism. I have arrived at godliness not by believing but by absolutely doubting. I have come to a certainty because I have doubted. I went on doubting till there was no possibility to doubt anymore, till I came across something indubitable. That has been my process.
That was not the process of Gurdjieff. He was learning from masters; moving from one master to another, learning techniques and methods and devices. He learned many devices, but he learned in a very surrendered spirit – that of a disciple.
I have never been anybody’s disciple; nobody has been my master. In fact, nobody was ready to accept me as a disciple because who would like to create trouble?

One of my professors, who is now dead, Dr. S. K. Saxena, loved me very much. The only man out of all my professors… Because I came across many professors and I had to leave many colleges and many universities. Rarely does one come across as many professors as I came across. He was the only man that I had some respect for because he never prevented me from doubting, from questioning; even though a thousand and one times he had to accept defeat. I respected him because he was capable of accepting defeat even from a student. He would simply say, “I accept defeat. You win. I cannot argue anymore. I have put forward all the arguments that I can muster and you have destroyed them all. Now I am ready to listen to you, if you have something to say.”
He was very afraid… When I was doing my final MA examination in philosophy he was very afraid because he loved me so much. He wanted me to get through the examination, but he was afraid – afraid that I might write things which were not according to the textbooks or were against the textbooks. I might say things which were not acceptable to the ordinary professors. Just to save me he gave the papers to people all over the country who were his friends and informed them: “Please take care of this young man, don’t be offended by him; that is his way. But he has great potential.”
There was only one thing he couldn’t manage; that was something to be decided by the vice-chancellor himself – the verbal examination. That was the last thing. The vice-chancellor invited a Mohammedan professor from Aligarh University, the head of the department of philosophy there, a very fanatic Mohammedan. My professor was very worried. He said to me again and again, “Don’t argue with this man. In the first place, he is a Mohammedan – Mohammedans don’t know what argument is. He is very fanatical; if he cannot argue with you he will take revenge. I know he cannot argue – I know him, I know you. But just remain quiet because this is the last thing. Don’t destroy all the effort I have made for you.” He said to me, “It is not your examination – it seems that I am being examined!”
I said, “I will see.”
The first question the Mohammedan professor asked was: “What is the difference between Indian and Western philosophy?”
I replied, “This is a stupid question. The very idea! This is nonsense. Philosophy is philosophy. How can philosophy be Indian? How can philosophy be Eastern or Western? If science is not Eastern nor Western, then why philosophy? Philosophy is a quest for truth. How can the quest be Eastern or Western? The quest is the same!”
My professor started pulling my leg underneath the table. I said, “Sir, stop. Don’t pull my leg! Forget about the examination – this thing has to be decided!”
The Mohammedan professor was at a loss. What was going on? He said, “What is the matter?”
I said, “He is pulling my leg. He is telling me that you are a Mohammedan – and a fanatic Mohammedan. He says that if you cannot argue well with me, you will take revenge! So do whatever you want, but I have to say what I feel. I don’t believe in all these distinctions. In fact, to me the very idea of somebody being a philosopher and yet a Mohammedan is simply illogical, it is ridiculous. How can you be a real inquirer if you have already accepted a certain dogma, a certain creed? If you start from a priori assumptions, if you start from a belief, you can never reach the truth. Real philosophy starts in a state of not-knowing. That is the beauty of doubt; it destroys all beliefs.”
For a moment he was shocked and felt almost dumb, but he had to give me ninety-nine marks out of a hundred. I asked him, “What happened to the last one?”
He said, “This is something! In the whole of my life, I have never given anybody ninety-nine marks out of a hundred. And you are asking me, ‘What happened to the last one?’”
I said, “Yes! Since you are giving me ninety-nine, I have every right to ask why you are so miserly. Just one! Make it a hundred – at least be generous for once!”
He had to make it a hundred.

My whole approach has been a totally different one to that of Ramakrishna and Gurdjieff. I have arrived through doubt, I have arrived through deep and profound skepticism. I have arrived, not through belief, but through the denial of all belief and disbelief too, because disbelief is belief in a negative form.
A moment came in my life when all beliefs and all disbeliefs disappeared and I was left utterly empty. In that emptiness the explosion happened. Hence, it is not so difficult for me, so I can argue easily. I can even argue against argument; that’s what I am going to continue to do. I can argue against intellect because I know how to use intellect.
Ramakrishna had never used his intellect; he started from the heart. The same is the case with Gurdjieff. Buddha could use the intellect because he was the son of a king, well educated, well cultured. All the great philosophers of the country were called to teach him; he knew what the intellectual approach was. And then he became fed up with it.
The same happened with me. I know what can be achieved through intellectual effort – nothing can be achieved through it. When I say it, I say it through my own experience.
But it has been beautiful in one way. It did not result in giving me truth – it cannot give truth to anybody – but in an indirect way it has cleansed the ground, it has prepared the ground. It has not helped me to realize myself, but it has helped me to communicate whatever I have realized.
I can communicate with you very easily, with no problem. You can ask all kinds of questions – you can ask, you can doubt – because I know that all these questions and doubts can be quashed, they can be destroyed. It is good that you should ask because then I can destroy your questions. Once all your questions are destroyed, the answer arises in your own being. In that utter emptiness something wells up; it is already there.
I am not in favor of repressing doubt by believing. You are not here to believe in me, you are here to bring out all your disbelief. Your doubts, your questions, all are respected, welcome, so that they can be taken out from you. Slowly, slowly a silence, a state of not-knowing arises. The state of not-knowing is the state of wisdom, is the state of enlightenment.

The second question:
Osho,
I belong to the legal profession and have a very legal mind. Can I also become a sannyasin?
Sannyas makes no conditions on you. Everybody is welcome – sinner and saint, legal experts, lawbreakers, virtuous people, criminals – all are welcome. Sannyas makes no precondition, although it will be a little difficult for you. But that is your problem, not mine. If you belong to the legal profession and have a very legal mind, it is going to be a little difficult for you. So what? Accept it as a challenge. Let it be difficult. In fact, the more difficult it is, the more challenging; the more interesting, intriguing it should be; the more attractive it should be. When something is very simple, who wants to do it? When something is difficult it provokes a challenge in you, it provokes intelligence in you.
It is difficult – and certainly difficult for a person who has a legal mind because a legal mind means a cunning mind. It is not necessarily intelligent; in fact, if it is intelligent it will not be cunning. Cunningness is a poor substitute for intelligence. The legal profession is the most cunning profession in the world.
It is known that Jesus moved with drunkards and gamblers and even a prostitute, but I have not heard that he moved with legal experts. In fact, the Jewish rabbi is nothing but a legal expert because the Jewish religion is more or less law and less of a religion. It is more or less a legal code. It does not have much metaphysics, it does not have great flights; it is very earthly. It tells you in detail what to do and what not to do. Those ten commandments – that may have been the beginning of the legal profession.
You can become a sannyasin. If even the desire has arisen in you, there seems to be a spark of intelligence. Behind all your cunningness there must be a little fire still left.
Don’t be worried. Come into this orange fire – it burns everything; it will burn you too. It consumes everything; it will consume the legal expert too. But only if you are ready to be consumed, if you are ready to drop your cunningness, because that will have to be dropped. Not that I say it is a condition, but as you become a sannyasin and as you move into meditation, you will start becoming more and more intelligent and, naturally, as a by-product, cunningness disappears.
If the legal profession disappears from the world, ninety percent of the cunningness will disappear with it. It is the people who know the law who go on creating confusion.

One of my vice-chancellors was a great law expert, a world-renowned law expert. He used to relate again and again that once he was fighting a case for an Indian maharajah in the Privy Council. He was such a drunkard… On the last night he had drunk too much and he still had a hangover, so he forgot whether he was for or against the maharajah. So for one hour he spoke against the maharajah! The maharajah was perspiring, his assistants were trembling: “What is he doing?” In the tea break they said to him, “What have you done? You have destroyed our client! Now there is no way to save him.”
He replied, “What has happened?”
“You have been speaking against our own client!”
He said, “Don’t be worried, there is still time.”
When the court started again he said, “You heard me, Your Honor, for one hour. Thank you for your patience because I was only giving all those arguments that are possible from the opposite side. Now I will defend my client.”
And he destroyed his own arguments and won the case!

The legal expert has no dedication to truth, he does not care about truth; he simply cares about whoever pays him. He is far worse than a prostitute. The prostitute only sells her body; the legal expert sells his mind. He is ready to be purchased by anybody – whoever is ready to pay the price. He does not care about what is right and what is wrong.
But if you become a meditator, you will start caring about what is right and what is wrong. Not that you will have to, not that it is a commandment, not that it is something like a character that has to be cultivated. It happens naturally that cunningness starts disappearing. So you have to be alerted to that.
You can become a sannyasin, there is no problem for me. I never ask anyone, “Who are you?” If you want to take sannyas I give you sannyas, unconditionally. Out of my love I give you sannyas, out of my respect for you I give sannyas. I respect each and every individual because to me each and every individual represents God, godliness. Even if the god has fallen very low and has become a legal expert, still the god is a god! Even in your fallen state I respect you, I will give you sannyas. It is for you to decide because this is risky – risky for you, for your profession.

In the days of the Raj in India, a British soldier was expected to do his duty and very little else. Any display of human weakness by the troops was regarded as letting the side down in front of the natives.
So naturally, the new commanding officer was very worried when an angry crowd of Hindus approached the barracks, complaining that one of their sacred cows had been outraged by an infantryman. They demanded an immediate court martial.
“Don’t worry, sir,” said an experienced law expert. “Our man is bound to get off. This cow has a very bad reputation – it has already been cited in seven previous cases.”

You get the idea? You will have to drop such legal expertise, you will have to drop such cunning approaches. You will have to become more human. But these are the consequences of meditation; nothing is imposed here.
Just the other day I was reading an article written by a bishop in The Times against me. He says: “Beware of this man.” He quotes me: “This man says, ‘Character is the concern of the stupid. The really intelligent people are only concerned with consciousness.’” He is quoting me to make people beware because this is a dangerous statement. He says: “Rather than publishing articles on this man, The Times should publish more articles on Mother Teresa of Calcutta, who teaches character. And character is the only thing, the real thing.”
Character is not the real thing at all. But the poor bishop has not understood what I have been saying. He does not understand the consequences of consciousness. Character is a consequence of consciousness. If character comes out of your consciousness, it has a beauty of its own; if it is just imposed from the outside, it is ugly. But that’s what Christians are doing all over the world – Hindus and Mohammedans too, they are all in the same boat.
My whole concern is consciousness. I teach you how to be more conscious because I know one thing for certain: that if you are more conscious your character will change of its own accord. A conscious person lives in a totally different way; he is more compassionate. Mother Teresa of Calcutta is not compassionate – she behaves compassionately, but is not compassionate. All her compassion is nothing but a means to reach heaven. To reduce compassion to a means is ugly; compassion is an end unto itself.
An ancient Taoist parable says…

A man fell into a well. He started shouting loudly, “Save me! I am drowning!”
A Buddhist monk passed by. He looked in the well and said, “Be calm, be quiet, don’t be disturbed. Life is a flux. It comes, it goes. Remember what Gautam the Buddha has said: ‘It is all dream.’ Your drowning is a dream, my seeing is a dream. Don’t shout. And even if you are saved, what is the point? Sooner or later you will have to die, so why not now? Why postpone it? Die silently, peacefully, so that you are not born again. Get out of the wheel of birth and death!”
The man was aghast. He said, “What nonsense are you saying! You can sermonize later on. First get me out! This is no time to teach me great philosophy.”
But the Buddhist said, “I cannot be distracted by things. The Buddha has said: ‘Walk on undistracted.’ Goodbye.” And he walked on, undistracted.
Then a Confucian monk looked in the well and the man said, “Now please save me. Don’t waste time!”
The Confucian monk said, “Do you know what the master has said? Confucius has said that each well should have a protective wall around it. Don’t be worried. I will create a great movement all over the country so that no well is unprotected like this.”
The man said, “But that is not going to save me!”
The Confucian monk said, “It is not a question of individuals. The master says that the question is always of the society, the question is of the future. Think of the future and think of the society. Don’t be so selfish!”
And he went into the marketplace and started teaching the people: “Look at this example of what is happening. Our master has already said that each well should have a protective wall. He is always right, but people have not listened to him and they are suffering.”
Then a Christian missionary looked into the well and the man said, “It seems my death is certain. Today no layman is coming to the side of the well! Now you will teach me your gospel!”
But the Christian said, “Don’t be worried.” Out of his bag he pulled a rope, threw the rope in, told the man to tie the rope around his waist and he would pull him out. The man was surprised – no metaphysics, no religion. He was pulled out, he was very thankful. He fell at his feet and he said, “You are the only really religious person! But I’m curious – how come you were carrying a rope in your bag?”
He said, “We always keep all kinds of arrangements with us. Who knows when the opportunity will arise to serve? Service is religion and it is through serving people that one can reach to heaven. I am not concerned with you,” said the missionary, “my concern is with my own place in heaven. Now I have scored! In fact, I am grateful to you. Go on falling in! Help us poor missionaries to serve you. Go on teaching that to your children and don’t listen to these Confucian people who say that every well needs a wall to protect it. If every well has a wall, nobody will fall in and how are we going to save people? And without saving people there is no way to heaven. Go on falling into wells, go on making wells without walls. Teach your children to fall in, because unless we serve you there is no way to God!”

Don’t laugh at it – this is the real situation. Just think: if there was no poverty in India, no orphans, no paralyzed people, no people suffering from leprosy, where would Mother Teresa of Calcutta be? Then no Nobel Prize either. These people are needed to create a Mother Teresa. These missionaries will not like a world where all are rich, happy.
Bertrand Russell used to say – and I agree with him absolutely – that much of religion will disappear if the world becomes rich and people are healthy, if people live long lives and their lives are joyous. It is true because much of religion depends on all these things, particularly Christianity.
Now, that bishop in London is saying that Mother Teresa is doing great work. But how will you be able to do great work if there are no longer any poor people; if there are no blind people, if there are no lepers? What are you going to do? The missionaries will be at a loss. You have to keep this world in the same misery and mess as it is still in. Otherwise, just think of the poor missionaries – they will be nowhere.
My concern is certainly with consciousness, not with character. My concern is to make you more aware, more alert, and out of that alertness whatever happens is good. If out of that alertness service happens, it is good; if love happens it is good; if compassion happens it is good; if sharing happens it is good because out of that awareness evil is impossible.
You are welcome. I am not concerned with what you are doing. My whole concern is with your being, not with your doing.

The last question:
Osho,
No! No! I don't get it! Breeches? Roar? What? Am I just dumb or something?
You are neither dumb nor “something.” Either you are British or you must have been British in your past life!

A seventy-five-year-old British field marshal tells his adjutant to bring his brigade to attention and announces: “Gentlemen, I am proud to tell you that at 08:30 hours, Greenwich Mean Time, my wife gave birth to a seven-and-a-half-pound baby boy! Gentlemen, I thank you!”

Get it?

This very proper Englishman walks into a pet shop. As he closes the door behind him he hears a voice welcoming him, “I know something about you! I know something about you!”
Embarrassed, he looks around and finds that it is a parrot. Impressed, he asks to buy the bird.
“So sorry, sir,” replies the owner, “I cannot sell it. But I can sell you a couple of eggs which after incubation will give you the same breed.”
The man buys the eggs, takes them home and puts them in the incubator. After ten days two little ducklings crawl out of the eggshells. Furious, he goes back to the shop to complain. As he enters he hears, “I know something about you! I know something about you!”
He hurries over to the parrot, looks it straight in the eyes and says, “Shut up! I know something about you too!”

Get it? Or not yet.

An Englishman and a Scotsman are sharing a train compartment with a lady and her pretty daughter. On entering a pitch black tunnel, a smacking kiss and a slap is heard. As they come out into daylight, the Englishman thinks, “Damn it, the Scot kissed her and I got paid off.”
The lady thinks, “God Almighty, one of these fellows kissed my daughter, but the good girl knew what to do. Whoever it was, he got his punishment.”
The girl thinks, “Pity, one of these fellows tried to kiss me and got my mother instead.”
Thinks the Scot, “When it comes to the next tunnel, I will kiss my hand again and give that English prick another whacking slap.”

Enough for today.

============================================================

The first question:
Osho,
I have been here now for almost two and a half years, but I still feel that something in my life goes basically wrong. Except for short glimpses, I am unable to find any lasting meaning in it. Most of the time I'm hanging in a bottomless, quite frightening, uncomfortable “nowhere.” What is wrong? Please comment.
Prem Gayan, the whole problem is rooted in the desire of attaining a permanent meaning for life. Life is not a problem at all, but we expect things which are against the fundamental law of life and then we are in trouble. Life is constantly changing and it is good that it is constantly changing; that’s its beauty, its splendor. If it were permanent, static, it would be not life but death and it would be utterly boring. It would stink because it would be stagnant. The mind is constantly asking for something permanent. The mind is the desire for the permanent and life is impermanence.
Hence, if you really want to be blissful you have to live the impermanent life as it is, without any expectation, without any imposition on your part. Flow with life. It changes – you change with it. Why bother about a permanent meaning? What will you do with a permanent meaning?
Meaning exists only when something functions as a means to some other end. Life is not a means to some other end, it is an end unto itself; hence, really it cannot have any meaning. That does not mean it is meaningless, it simply means it is transcendental to meaning or no-meaning. Those words are irrelevant.
What is the meaning of a roseflower? What is the meaning of a sunset? What is the meaning of love? What is the meaning of beauty? There are no meanings because they are not means to anything else. A sunset is simply beautiful just for its own sake. It has no utility, you cannot use it as a commodity. A car has meaning, a machine has meaning, a house has meaning, but what is the meaning of a roseflower? There is no meaning in it, but because there is no meaning in it, it has tremendous beauty. A machine, however meaningful, is never beautiful; it can’t be – it is a commodity, it is utilitarian, it is not poetry.
Life is poetry, life is a song, life is a dance.
Gayan, your very approach is wrong, that’s why you go on missing. You say: “Except for short glimpses, I am unable to find any lasting meaning in it.” Just meditate over those short glimpses. Those glimpses must have happened when you were not seeking for meaning; when you were relaxed; when you had forgotten all about meaning; when you were not concerned about meaning. Then, suddenly there was joy, there was bliss.
The moment you start grabbing, clinging to those beautiful glimpses, those moments; the moment your mind says, “Make it permanent. Now this is the thing that I have been always asking for, now don’t let it go,” you destroy it, you kill it. The glimpse disappears; it remains only a memory and it goes on fading far away. Soon you will not be able even to believe that it had existed. It will happen again only when you have forgotten the constant desire for meaning, the constant desire for permanency, the constant desire that things should be according to you.
No, that is not the way of a sannyasin, Gayan. A sannyasin has no expectations from existence. He simply flows with existence without any resistance. The sannyasin allows existence to have its own course; wherever it leads, the sannyasin is ready to go with it. The sannyasin has no destination, no goal as such. And these glimpses will be coming more and more.
But you have to meditate on these glimpses – when they happen, how they happen, what makes them happen. You will find a few essential things: you are relaxed when they happen; you are at rest when they happen; you have no desire when they happen; you are not greedy when they happen; you are not thinking of meaning, significance, value when they happen. There is the secret. Drop all these hindrances forever. Let life exist according to its own harmony. Simply be a part in it, just a wave in the ocean. Don’t try to dominate the ocean – that very effort is an ego trip.
Meditate over Murphy’s maxim: “If you don’t care where you are, you ain’t lost.”
And also: “Nothing is ever so bad that it can’t get worse.”
Rejoice! Why be afraid of the “nowhere”? Everywhere is nowhere. Wherever you are it is nowhere. Existence is infinite, so you will always be in the nowhere. You have to accept it. Buddha calls it tathata – suchness. Such is the case: wherever you are it is nowhere, whoever you are, you are a nobody.
Once these truths are accepted, life starts happening in a totally different way because in this acceptance the ego dies. The ego can exist only through resistance, through fight, through struggle.
That’s what you have been doing, Gayan. But it is nothing especially about you, that’s how the whole German mind is conditioned.
Gayan is a German – one hundred percent German. Once, I wanted to choose her as one of my mediums, but I had to drop that idea, at least for the time being, for the simple reason that the German conditioning is very deep-rooted in her. She could not flow with my energy – unconsciously, she was not aware. She wanted to be a medium and she was immensely happy that I had called her; she was hoping that she would be chosen. She would have been chosen, but there was a deep resistance, unconsciously. Consciously she was totally in my hands, but unconsciously she was trying to give my energy a certain shape, a certain pattern, a certain flow. Hence, I thought it better to wait a little longer.
Gayan, you will have to drop your German conditioning. That conditioning is good if you want to become a soldier, but it is not good if you want to become a sannyasin. They are poles apart – they are just the opposite of each other. The sannyasin has to be utterly restful, relaxed, a resistanceless hollow bamboo – so he can become a flute for the divine lips, so a song can flow through him.
It will happen, Gayan; it is going to happen. If glimpses are happening then there is no problem. If, once in a while, a few windows open, then doors will also open. You can escape through those windows into the open sky. But you are too involved in becoming perfect. Drop that idea. Imperfection is perfectly good. Don’t try to do the impossible. Just being ordinary is immensely beautiful.
But I can see her problems. The fundamental problem: she is a German. The second problem: she has worked as a fashion model so she has the idea of how to be perfectly beautiful. Those things have gone deep inside her. She is a perfectionist, so wherever she has been in these two and a half years she has come into conflict with people. Because this place is not for perfectionists, this place is a crazy place – it is absolutely un-German. And the problem is that I have got so many German sannyasins. I can understand why the German government is so worried because I am destroying their young people – I am destroying their conditioning as Germans. Once they have been sannyasins, once they have understood the art of being a sannyasin, then no Adolf Hitler can ever dominate them; that is impossible.
Perfectionism is a kind of neurosis. It is neurotic – it is a beautiful name for neurosis. Gayan, drop that idea. Just be ordinary, simple, nobody, and things will start happening in leaps and bounds.
I am sending her back to Germany for a few days, just to see and compare what has happened to her. She won’t be able to realize it here; she will be able to realize it only in Germany. There she will be able to see that in these two and half years much water has gone down the Ganges; she is no longer the same person. There, she will be able to recognize how people are behaving, how people are being trained to be neurotics. And when she is back, I hope she will come with a better understanding, more relaxed, more restful.
I have great hopes about you, Gayan – much is possible. You are just on the verge. If you start accepting things as they are and drop the idea of how they should be, if you drop the “shoulds” and “should-nots,” there is not much trouble. Life starts helping you, caring about you. Life is very caring, very loving; we just never allow it. We are always trying to force it our way and that is not possible. Life cannot go our way, we have to go life’s way.
That’s what I mean when I emphasize again and again the philosophy of let-go. Let-go is my only approach toward life and existence.

The second question:
Osho,
I just decided to take sannyas because I wanted to do it during my five weeks of being here. Now inner struggles start again; I feel under pressure and that it was not a free decision and did not really come from my heart.
Please don’t take sannyas. Wait. This is not the right time. If it is not really coming from your heart don’t force it upon yourself; it will be something imposed and ugly. Anything imposed becomes ugly, even sannyas. It will be plastic, it will not be real, it will not be alive. There is no need. If it happens spontaneously without any feeling of pressure, only then; otherwise it will create trouble for you and I am not here to create unnecessary trouble for you. Once you are a sannyasin there are many, many, necessary troubles, so avoid unnecessary troubles as far as possible because there are too many necessary ones.
Never do anything for the wrong reasons – so many people are taking sannyas because their friends have taken sannyas, “There must be something in it – why are so many people attracted.” These are all the wrong reasons.
Murphy says: “Nothing is ever done for the right reasons.”
He is right in almost ninety-nine point nine percent of cases; nothing is ever done for the right reasons. People go on doing things for the wrong reasons and complain that their life is miserable. It is bound to be so. They are responsible for it, nobody else is.
Do things only for the right reasons. The right reasons always come from your heart, not from your head.
Murphy also says: “No matter where you go, there you are.”
So how is it going to help? You may become a sannyasin, you may wear orange, but there you are underneath the orange clothes, behind a new name. Everything will be old, just the label will be changed. By changing the label you don’t go through a revolution, you are not reborn. And unless you are reborn you cannot be a sannyasin.
Wait. This is not the right time. Never be in a hurry about such important matters. It is a question of life and death – in fact far more important than life and death because it can take you beyond life and death. That’s the whole alchemy of sannyas: to take you beyond life and death. It is far more important than anything else, so one should not be in a hurry. Don’t be impatient.
During these five weeks just be here, meditate, do a few groups, watch the sannyasins, then go back home. Don’t create this anxiety in your mind: “To be or not to be…” Otherwise your five weeks will be wasted. You will not be able to participate in anything totally because your constant worry will be: “When am I going to take sannyas?” If you don’t take sannyas you will feel you are missing; if you do, you will think you have done something which was not coming out of your heart. Either way you will be a loser.
There is a season, a right season, when things happen easily, when you need not do them, when they simply happen; you are only a witness that they are happening. Just as the snake leaves its old skin one day, slips out of it – it did not make the decision; the time had come. One day the child is born out of the womb; nine months are over. It is not a decision on the child’s part, “Now is the time for me to be born.” Spring comes and flowers and flowers… The whole earth rejoices.
Sannyas also happens like that. There is beauty, there is grace and only then are you a sannyasin. It is not a question of being recruited; it is not some discipline that has to be forced on you; it is not a question of arguing for or against. When it comes from your heart there is no alternative, there is no either/or; it is not philosophy.
Søren Kierkegaard has written a beautiful book. The name of the book is: Either/Or. It is not only the name of the book, his whole life can be called an experiment in either/or. During his whole life, he was never decisive – always thinking whether to do it or not to do it.
For years a woman waited for him and he was unable to decide whether to marry her or not. He pondered and pondered, consulted encyclopedias; great treatises on marriage and love; took many notes for and against; weighed it this way and that, but could not come to a conclusion. All the arguments came out almost equal. Much could be said for, much could be said against, and it was so equally balanced – how to decide? Tired, the woman married somebody else.
This was his whole life: he went on pondering and pondering about everything; he never could do anything. If death had also been a question to be decided by him he would not have died yet; he would be sitting in Copenhagen and pondering over death. If birth had been a question about a decision on his part he would have never been born; he would have pondered and pondered in the mother’s womb, sitting there – to come out or not?
His approach, this stupid approach toward life, became so famous that when he used to walk down the streets – only once a month; he had to go to the bank to draw some money… His father, seeing his son and his inability to decide about anything, had deposited some money in his name because it was absolutely certain he would not be able to do anything in his life. A good offer had come for a professorship. He pondered so long that the university decided to appoint somebody else. So he lived in a very poor way, because the money in the bank was limited – that was his only money and he had to live his whole life on just that money.
Once a month, the first day of the month, he would go to the bank to withdraw a small sum of money and come back home. Even going to the bank, he would ponder whether to go this way or that. He would stand at the crossroads for hours – and not just once, it was an every-month affair Every month, again and again he had to decide. His approach became so famous that urchins used to follow him from his house to the bank and from the bank to the house, calling out behind him, “Either/Or, Either/Or, Either/Or!” Copenhagen knew him not by his name, Søren Kierkegaard, his name became Either/Or.
Wait. When you come next time – if I am still here… Up to then, wait. When you want to postpone a thing, there is no better time than the present. And who knows? We may not be made for each other. I am not saying that you are not made for me, that I cannot say, but I may not be made for you; that much I can say. I may not deserve you. So leave it aside – the very question has to be put aside.
She has also asked another question: “Osho, when you tell jokes I cannot laugh. I can only listen to serious things.” That’s enough indication that we don’t deserve each other. Certainly I don’t deserve you – I take the whole responsibility on myself. This place will not fit with you and it will be difficult for me to make the whole lot fit with you, and according to you. If you can only listen to serious things… Listen! The world is full of serious things.
This is a place of laughter and love. We don’t believe in serious things, we believe in living nonseriously.

The third question:
Osho,
What is Gautam the Buddha's message in short?
All things being equal, you lose. All things being in your favor, you still lose. Win or lose, you lose.

The fourth question:
Osho,
I am a fool. What should I do?
That’s just far out! Don’t do a thing. Please remain as you are. Remember… Fools rush in and get the best seats.

The fifth question:
Osho,
You said today that all women are essentially nuns, but that no men are monks. But since I came to live in Pune my sexual energy seems to have disappeared – I think I'm just terrified of all the vibrant, alive women here!
Swami Anand Neeraj, I think you are turning into a nun – miracles happen! I will have to change your name; just wait a little longer. If you finally decide that it has really happened and it was not just a passing phase, you will be known as Ma Anand Neeraj.

An old man phoned his son-in-law – he had just married his daughter – and asked him, “How are things going?”
The son-in-law said, “I am sorry to say, sir, but it seems I am married to a nun.”
The old man said, “What do you mean – ‘married to a nun’?”
The young man said, “None in the night, none in the morning.”
The old man laughed and he said, “Now I understand. Then tonight come for dinner at my home and see the Mother Superior.”

If, Neeraj, you have turned into a nun, then slowly you will grow into a Mother Superior. Don’t be worried. Growth is all that is needed – this is a growth center. Just go on growing. Don’t be worried about what you are growing into; growth is the point. If you are growing, all is right.

The sixth question:
Osho,
A few questions…
Now I always get puzzled with Dutch names. The spelling says “Joke,” but Dutch people are strange, they pronounce it as “Yokay” – they destroy the whole beauty of it! Okay, Yokay…

The first question:
How many Women Libbers does it take to screw in a light bulb? – five: one to screw it in and four to consider the implications.

Second:
And how many Buddhists does it take to screw in a light bulb? – two: one to screw it in and one not to screw it in.

Third:
And how many Jewish mothers does it take to screw in a light bulb? – none: the Jewish mother says, “So? I will sit in the dark!”

And fourth:
How many sannyasins does it take to change a light bulb? – only one to screw in the light bulb and ten thousand to celebrate the great occasion.

The seventh question:
Osho,
What is being open?
Being open simply means being without mind. If the mind is present you are closed. Mind is a wall surrounding you. It is a transparent wall. Hence, you can see through it and you can go on living behind it without ever becoming aware that you are living in a prison cell. Prisons should be made of glass, then very few people will suffer so much in prisons. They will be able to see the people walking and talking on the road; they will be able to see everything and believe that they are free. If they are not going out and mixing with people, that is simply their own decision that they don’t want to mix with the crowds. They are “aristocrats,” they are not ordinary people, they are “special” people. And these walls which cannot be seen will not be thought of as walls, they will look like protection.
That’s how the mind is: mind is a transparent wall of glass, very transparent glass – Belgian-made, not Indian, because in India you cannot make transparent glass; it is impossible.
If you have a mind then politically it is going to be either communist, socialist or fascist; religiously it is going to be Catholic, Protestant, Christian, Hindu, Mohammedan; philosophically it will belong to a certain school of philosophy. It can’t be free. Mind cannot have freedom – its very existence is a slavery – and it keeps you closed. You always look from a certain fixed angle, from a certain fixed obsession; you can’t see things as they are. It is impossible for the mind to see things as they are – it is inevitable that it will distort them according to its own a priori conclusions.
I was telling you just the other day that I received a letter from an Irish mother, written to her daughter who is a sannyasin here. She says that she has been reading my books, has looked at pictures of me, and feels something – the books are beautiful. The only question she wants to ask is: “Is this man a Catholic or not? If he is a Catholic then everything is okay; if he is not a Catholic, then come back home as soon as possible.”
And Irish Mukta has also received a letter from her mother, a totally different letter, but in a way the same. Mukta’s mother says, “As I have understood it, you are in the best place in the world. The only thing that disturbs me is that it is a religious place; if it were not for the religion, then it would be one hundred percent beautiful.” Now, for one, the word religion is creating trouble; for the other, if it is not Catholic then there is trouble.
People go on inquiring who I am: Hindu, Christian, Mohammedan. I say that I am neither this nor that; I am simply a blissful man who is enjoying life in its totality. I call this religion – the only real religiousness.
Dropping the mind is becoming open. Meditation is an effort to dismantle the wall brick by brick. Sannyas is a decision that we will behead ourselves and we will start living as no-minds. We will function from a state of not-knowing because only then are you innocent and only then are you open. That’s the really scientific attitude, the scientific approach toward life.
At the ultimate peak, science and religion have to meet. If both are seeking truth – and both are seeking truth – then at the ultimate peak they are bound to meet. However different are the paths they follow, their fundamental, their essential core cannot be different. The essential core of the scientific approach is that you should not approach any fact with a conclusion; you should approach the fact in a state of not-knowing. Only then will you be able to encounter it as it is. If you have a certain idea, your idea is going to influence your conclusion; your observation will become prejudiced. A prejudiced mind can never be scientific; in fact, a prejudiced mind is the only mind there is. Hence, I say a mind can never be scientific, nor can a mind be religious.
Science approaches the outer world of facts without any fanatical attitudes, and religion approaches the inner world of facts without any fanatical attitudes. The fanatic believes more in his fiction than in the facts. He imposes his fictions on the facts.

A certain Dr. Bannerji came to me; he wanted my help. He said, “I am a scientist.” He is the head of a department at Rajasthan University, doing some research work in parapsychology. He is the head of the parapsychology department. He told me that he wanted my help because he was doing some scientific work on the theory of reincarnation: that man is born many times, again and again.
I talked with him and asked, “Do you believe in reincarnation?”
He replied, “Certainly. I am a Hindu and I believe that it is true. Now I want to prove it scientifically.”
I said, “From the very beginning, your research is unscientific. If you are a Hindu and you believe that it is true without experimenting – without going into the process of experimentation; without gathering the facts –and already the belief is there, then you will impose your belief. You will not listen to the facts. You will try to distort the facts according to your theory, according to your a priori belief. You are not a scientist at all. Forget that idea that you are a scientist. Who has given you a PhD? And what nonsense are you doing in your parapsychology department? Better call it the teaching of Hindu religion. Why call it parapsychology?
“Some Christian will try to prove scientifically that there is no reincarnation, that there is only one life. And if it is to be proved democratically, Christians, Jews and Mohammedans outnumber Hindus. And if it is to be decided democratically, by vote, then they will win because how many Hindus are there? Almost half of humanity is Christian; the second great religion is Mohammedanism, then there are Jews – all three together are enough to defeat a small community of Hindus very easily. If everybody sets out with his belief to find out facts to prove it; it is not scientific.”
He had come to stay for a few days; he immediately escaped and since then I haven’t heard of him. He was not interested in inquiring, he did not have an open mind, but he confessed to me that he was a Hindu thinking that I was also a Hindu. He would not have said that to any Christian, Mohammedan or Jew. He was very embarrassed when I said these things to him. The last thing he asked was, “You are not a Hindu?”
I said, “I am nobody. Why should I be a Hindu? Blood is neither Hindu, Mohammedan, Christian, nor bones are Hindu, Mohammedan, Christian. How can consciousness be Hindu, Mohammedan, Christian? I am just my consciousness, I am my bliss. How can bliss be Hindu or Mohammedan?”

Being open means dropping your mind politically, religiously, philosophically; dismantling it brick by brick. It is a painful process, but it is the only way to know the truth and it is the only way to be free from all kinds of superstitions; from all kinds of fanatical beliefs. The idea of the fanatic is: “My religion is true and don’t be misled by the facts.” He does not trust the facts; he believes his dogma. The more ancient it is, the more he believes in it. His idea is: “How could people have believed in it for such a long period? It must be true.”
But the Jews are as old as the Hindus and they have always believed that there is only one life; Hindus have always believed that there are many lives. The religions that were born out of Hinduism – Jainism and Buddhism – both believe in many lives. The religions that were born out of Judaism – Christianity and Islam – believe that there is no other life, only one life. Time cannot be decisive, nor can numbers be decisive.
Only a scientific approach or a religious approach… It is the same to me. I call it science when your inquiry is objective; I call it religious when your inquiry is subjective, but for both inquiries, an open consciousness is absolutely required. That is the first, fundamental requirement: a consciousness without any mind – and that can happen only through meditation. Meditation is the only magic that can help you to be free from the mind; can help you to be free from yourself, your past and all the burden of the past.

The eighth question:
Osho,
What is the difference between an optimist and a pessimist?
Not much. An optimist believes we live in the best of all possible worlds. A pessimist fears this is true.

The ninth question:
Osho,
Can I count on you to kill me?
Prem Kavita, certainly but you are not ready yet. I am ready to kill, but you can be killed only at the right moment, not even a single minute before. You are not ready yet. Your desire is good, but it is only a desire. You will have to deserve it.
Just last night, I killed Magga. Now she is crying, not understanding what has happened. She was a medium; suddenly I dropped her. It is ego-shattering. The mediums are bound to feel special; they can start gathering a certain ego in themselves – they can become serious.
I have been looking at your questions, Kavita. All your questions show a certain sarcastic attitude. This is the first question that I have chosen worth answering, otherwise I simply throw them in the wastepaper basket. They don’t show love, they don’t show trust, they don’t show surrender. If I kill you without your love it will be murder. If I kill you with your love it is transformation. You will have to look deep within yourself; somewhere the bridge has not happened yet. You are here, but your questions show that you are still functioning from knowledge.
Kavita is a breath therapist here; that may be the cause of the whole trouble. If you are a therapist here you start feeling a certain ego, a subtle ego. The cleaners, the toilet cleaners are in a far better situation. They cannot carry any ego. It has been my experience that they come far closer to me than the therapists, because the therapist comes with the idea that he “knows.” Somewhere, deep down he also carries the idea that he is helping Osho’s work; that he is very essential to the work; that he is indispensable; that without him there will be a gap – he is needed. The cleaner cannot feel that, hence sometimes the toilet cleaners blossom.
Just three days ago I chose Nandan as a new medium. She has been a cleaner, but I am surprised at her availability, at her total surrender, at her absolute trust. I can flow through her just as the wind can pass through the pine trees – no hindrance, no obstruction.
Kavita, I don’t feel that in you yet. I am ready to kill – that’s my whole function here. A master is needed only because you cannot kill your own ego, it is a difficult task. It can be done, but it is a very difficult task. It is almost like pulling yourself up by your shoestrings. It is difficult; some help is needed. Some help can be given, but it can be given only when there is no ego.
Kavita, meditate over it. The day you are ready… My sword is always ready! What am I doing in my room the whole day? – polishing my sword so it does not gather rust.

The tenth question:
Osho,
You said that there is a Russian here. What do you think of Russians? Will there be a Third World War?
Russians are beautiful people, but they are victims of a very stupid philosophy, of a very stupid political ideology. The people are beautiful, but they are dominated by the most ugly regime ever.
A few of my sannyasins in Russia – of course they are underground sannyasins – have sent me a few jokes. Just the other day I received them. They have been translating jokes, newsletters, Sannyas magazine and circulating them underground. They gather once in a while to listen to a tape, to meditate. They have been hearing so many jokes about everybody that they must be feeling that I am not paying any attention to them, so they have sent me two beautiful jokes.
First:

A man goes into a food shop in Moscow and asks for two kilos of meat. As usual, the shopgirl answers, “No meat today, Comrade.”
“No meat!” he shouts. “No meat! They haven’t got any meat!” He runs into the street with both arms raised, shouting at the top of his voice, “No meat! No meat! They haven’t got any meat!” On he continues down the street shouting at everyone, “They haven’t got any meat! No meat!”
He makes such a noise that the police come running. They see him shouting his head off, immediately arrest him and take him off to prison. In his cell he continues to cry out as he shakes the bars, “No meat! They haven’t got any meat!”
“We’ll have to teach this chap a lesson,” says the prison officer. “Take him out into the yard and pretend you’re going to shoot him. That’ll soon shut him up!”
So the guard marches the man, still shouting, into the yard. They line him up against the wall, load the rifles with empty cartridges, take aim and fire.
There are a few seconds’ silence and suddenly the cry goes up. “No bullets! No bullets! They haven’t got any bullets either!”

And the second:

A Swede, a Pole and a Russian met and naturally their conversation got round to sex.
“Sex in Sweden,” said the Swede, “is a group of people getting together in someone’s flat and having an orgy.”
“Sex in Poland,” said the second man, “is a group of people watching a program on TV about people having an orgy in a flat in Sweden.”
“What does sex mean in Russia?” they both asked the third man.
“Sex in Russia,” said the man sadly, “is a group of people meeting someone from Poland who saw the TV program about the Swedish people having an orgy…”

They are beautiful people but under a rotten regime. They need to be freed – they need to be freed from this violence, this dictatorship that is imposed on them against their will. But the imposers say that this is for their own sake. In the beginning the communists used to say that the dictatorship was only a temporary phenomenon; soon it would disappear. Once socialism was established even the state would wither away, so what to say about dictatorship? But now sixty years have passed since the Revolution; just the contrary has happened. The state has become more and more powerful. There seems to be no sign of its ever withering away. It is the first time in the whole history of humanity that a state is so powerful that there is no possibility of any revolution against it.
No people have ever been so crippled and paralyzed. Before there was at least a possibility of rebelling against a regime. If it was too much you could always throw it away. But now, for the first time it has happened: the Russian government is so powerful, so immensely powerful, that the individual is nothing.
And they have learned one thing: how to prevent a revolution from the very beginning, from the very seeds of revolution, so not even freedom of opinion is allowed. You are even afraid to talk to your own wife because, who knows? – she may be an informer. Nobody knows about anybody. You are afraid to talk to your own children because they belong to the Young Communists’ League and they inform against their parents. Only in Russia do walls have ears – only in Russia. Everywhere else it is only a proverb, in Russia it is a reality. You cannot even think independently because to think independently you need certain things to be made available. If Marx had been born in Russia he would not have been able to write Das Kapital because there is no British Museum where he could have gone and consulted all kinds of books.
My books cannot enter Russia legally. They enter illegally, but not legally. The government watches everything that comes in. For freedom of thought you need some kind of climate; that climate has been destroyed. Every child is conditioned according to the state religion – communism is the state religion.
Russians are beautiful people, as all people are beautiful. They deserve the love, sympathy, compassion and help of the whole world because there is only one possibility: if the free world helps them from the outside, only then can they be freed. Otherwise now, the government is so powerful scientifically and technologically that it is impossible to overthrow it, absolutely impossible to throw it. Even to talk about overthrowing is enough – you will disappear. Wherever you have gone, you will never be found again. Anybody who disagrees politically is immediately declared a mental case. According to their definition, according to their belief, only a madman can disagree with communism. How can a sane man disagree with communism? That’s what fanaticism is. Even if the person is a Nobel prize-winner, it does not matter – if he disagrees about anything he is insane. Now, he is not even declared a political prisoner, he is not thrown in jail, because that has certain respect.
Jesus was crucified; that was respectful. At least they accepted him as a dangerous man. But if Jesus was born in Russia he would not be crucified, remember; they would simply declare him mad. They would give him electric shocks, not crucifixion. They would give him insulin shock therapy; they would operate on his brain. They would destroy his whole nervous system – they would make him a wreck of a man. They would not kill him; that way they would look very compassionate. They would not crucify him; there is no need to crucify now. He would be put in a mental hospital where he would be given treatment along with the mad people; that would be far more dangerous.
Treating Socrates in a madhouse would have been far more disrespectful. At least the Greeks were respectful; they poisoned him – that’s okay. If you don’t agree with the man and the man is not ready to agree with you, you kill him. It seems perfectly okay. But to make him a madman and then torture him and slowly, slowly destroy his whole mechanism of thinking, his whole brain system; to operate on his brain and do damage to his brain, that is ugly. That’s what is happening in Russia.
Russians are beautiful people, but they are living under a very ugly regime. It is the responsibility of the whole of humanity to help them to be free of this big prison, these iron walls that surround them.
You also ask me: “Will there be a Third World War?” It is impossible. A Third World War is not possible for the simple reason that science has given us so much technology to destroy each other that a Third World War means a total world war. A total world war means that nobody will be the survivor – there will be neither any winner or any loser. For the first time, war has lost all its meaning. It is not because of Buddha or Christ that the Third World War is not going to happen. It is because of scientific technology – atom bombs, hydrogen bombs, super hydrogen bombs, death rays. They have made it impossible. Unless we decide on a global suicide, a Third World War is impossible.
Small conflicts will go on happening because they are needed; they are an economic need. Sometimes it will happen in Vietnam, sometimes in Korea, in Israel, in Kashmir, in Afghanistan – small wars, not a third world war. Small wars have to happen, otherwise where are these big powers going to sell their weapons? And those weapons are accumulating. Every day, new developments are happening, so their old weapons become out of date. Who is going to use them? They cannot use them; they cannot be used by themselves. Poor countries, backward countries, like India, Pakistan, Bangladesh, Afghanistan, Iran; these small countries can be sold out-of-date weapons. So these countries have to continuously quarrel with each other – small quarrels, lukewarm fights. The superpowers, America and Russia, need these wars to sell their weapons, otherwise their stockpile of weapons will be so great that they themselves will die under the burden. So these small wars are an absolute necessity.
The backward countries are so foolish that they can’t see the point, so somewhere or other a war erupts. One country starts purchasing weapons from America, another country starts purchasing weapons from Russia. Both are in a way in the same business. Those who can see, they can see they are partners – they both need wars to continue somewhere or other. But they would not trigger a Third World War, no, because a Third World War means those two superpowers coming in conflict directly.
If Russia attacks America, it will take only ten minutes for America to retaliate; or if America attacks Russia, it will take only ten minutes for Russia to retaliate. There will be only a ten-minute gap, that’s all. If you think that is a victory, it is okay. After ten minutes both are finished. In fact, if the superpowers come into conflict, there is every possibility that people who are very primitive and living far away in the forests of South Africa or in the Himalayas, or in Tibet, may be the only survivors. They will be the only people who will be benefited. For the first time their backwardness will pay off, for the first time they will be the winners and the winners will be the losers. But that too is a far, faraway, a remote possibility because a Third World War will trigger so much fire around the earth that there seems to be no possibility that anybody can survive. Not only human beings – trees, birds, animals, all will be gone.
Hence, I can say categorically that there is not going to be any Third World War. With the Second World War, world wars were finished. Now there will be only small fights – battles but not wars.

The last question:
Osho,
I am leaving for Italy. Would you please tell me a joke to tell to the Italiano?
Sarjano, never ask for one joke. You can ask Laxmi that whenever I order one thing, she always orders two – she knows me. So whenever you ask for one joke you have to suffer two.
First:

Two Italian nuns were sitting at the table talking about the beauty of the flowers, plants and vegetables in the garden of their nunnery.
One of the nuns says, “Did you see the big, red, juicy tomatoes in the vegetable garden?”
As she is talking she joins both hands into a circle, showing the size of the tomatoes.
“Yes,” answers the other nun, “and did you see the size of the cucumbers this year?”
While she is describing them, her hands indicate the size of the long cucumbers.
An elderly nun sitting in the corner of the same room, nearly deaf but not blind yet, asks with an eager voice, “Which Father are you talking about?”

And second:

Once, an explosion happened in an Italian salami factory and one of the salamis is blown into heaven. An angel flying around heaven bumps into the salami and grabs it with her wing. “This is a funny thing,” she says. “I wonder what it is?”
She flies to Joseph swinging the salami in front of his nose and asks, “Have you ever seen such a thing before?”
Joseph, staring at the salami, says, “No, I’ve never seen one before!”
The angel flies away and meets Mary. “Mary, do you know what this is?” she says, swinging the salami in front of her.
“Oh!” exclaims Mary, “You know, if there wasn’t that funny net around it, I would say it is the Holy Ghost!”

Enough for today.

============================================================

The first question:
Osho,
What is the goal of meditation?
There is no goal of meditation. Meditation is the dropping of all goals, hence it can’t have a goal of its own; that will be against its very nature. Goals exist in the future; meditation is to be in the present. There is no meeting ground between the present and the future – the future exists not – how can the nonexistential meet the existential? That is impossible The future is our creation, it is our imagination. We create it for a certain purpose; the purpose is to avoid the present. We don’t want to be in the present, we want to escape from the present. The future gives us an escape. To live in the future is to be an escapist.
Whatever the goal… It does not matter what that goal is – it may be God-realization, it may be attainment of nirvana; still it is a goal and any goal is against meditation. But our whole mind exists in the future; our mind is against the present. In the present the mind dies. How can the mind exist in the present? If you are utterly now, utterly here, there is no question of the mind. You cannot think because thinking needs space and the present has no space in it. It is just like a needle point – it cannot contain anything, not even a single thought.
Hence if you want to live in the mind, either you have to live in the past or in the future; these are the two ways. The old-fashioned, the orthodox, the conventional – the Christians, the Mohammedans, the Hindus – they live in the past. And the so-called revolutionaries, the progressives, the avant-garde, they live in the future. The communists, the socialists, the Fabians, the utopians and all kinds of idealists, they live in the future. On the surface they seem to be very different – the Catholic and the communist seem to be antagonistic. Deep down they are not antagonistic at all. They belong to the same category, they are doing the same work: they both are escaping from the present.
The Hindu lives in the golden age that has passed. His golden age was somewhere far, far away in the past. It is only a memory – it has never been there. That past is simply a creation of imaginative people, but it helps them to escape from the present. Hindus call it ramrajya – the kingdom of God; it was so in the past, and since then man has been falling down. Hence Hindus cannot agree with Charles Darwin about the idea of evolution. Hindus have a totally different idea – the idea of involution, not evolution. Man is not progressing, man is regressing. Man is falling every day; he is going downhill. The peaks are left in the past – the golden peaks, the sunlit peaks.
The communist lives in the future; his golden age has still to come. It will come one day, somewhere far away in the future when the state withers away; when the society becomes classless; when there is no exploitation; when there is no need for any government; when people live in equality. That will be the kingdom of God – but that is in the future. That too is never going to happen.
The communist and the Hindu are both doing the same thing, they are partners in the same business. The business is how to escape from the present, how not to live in the present. Hence you will see a strange thing happening: Hindus are against me, Mohammedans are against me; Christians are against me, communists are against me. On one thing they all agree, at least on one thing they all agree. At least I am happy that I give them one point to agree about. But in fact, they do agree because my insistence is against the past and against the future. My insistence is on being in the present. Hence meditation cannot allow any desire for goals.
I can understand your question, because the mind always asks, “Why are you doing it?” It can’t do anything simply, spontaneously – the “why” is always there. In your life, you don’t know any action which is spontaneous, you don’t know any response. All that you do is not action, but in fact, reaction. You do it because there are reasons for doing it, there are motives for doing it, there are desires behind it. Something is either pushing from behind or pulling from the front. You are never acting out of freedom; you are a slave. Hence you always ask why.

A man was sent by his psychiatrist to the mountains just for a change, to rest, relax and to enjoy nature. The next day his telegram arrived: “I am feeling very happy. Why?”

One cannot accept anything without asking why. Now, one thing has to be understood about happiness; misery may have causes, happiness has no cause. If it has a cause, it is nothing but misery masquerading as happiness. When happiness is true – that’s what is meant by bliss. It has no cause, no causality. It is beyond cause and effect; it is beyond the chain of cause and effect. You cannot answer why.
Buddha was asked many times, “Why are you so blissful, so peaceful? He always said, “Such is the nature of awareness – tathata.”
Now his answer has to be deeply pondered over. He says, “There is no ‘why’ to it – such is the case. The trees are green and the flowers are red, and the man who is awakened is blissful. There is no ‘why’ to it.”
But the people who were asking again and again… I think he must have been asked the same question thousands of times by different people. People may look different from the outside, but deep down they are all unconscious. So the same question arises again and again out of their unconscious mind: “Why? There must be some reason. Have you discovered some treasure? Have you found some Kohinoor? Have you found some alchemy to transform baser metal into gold? Have you found some secret that can make you immortal? Why are you so blissful?”
The people who are asking are saying something about themselves. They are not really asking why Buddha is blissful – they can’t understand Buddha. They know only themselves. They know they are miserable and that their misery has a cause, and once in a while, when they feel happy, that happiness is also caused by something. You win a lottery and you are happy; without the lottery how can you be happy? And Buddha has not won any lottery. In fact, he has renounced his palace and kingdom and all riches. The people must have been searching, trying to find out: “There must be something he has found which he is hiding and not telling us about. What is it? Why do you look so happy?”
Prabhu Maya has asked me a question – the same question that buddhas have always been asked, is being asked here too again and again. She asks, “Osho, I have recently been discovering the phoniness behind the smile I sometimes wear. Now I wonder about you – the same face, the same smile every morning, year in, year out. Is it for real?”
I can understand her question because whenever she is smiling she knows it is phony, and I am constantly smiling. Naturally, year in and year out, it must be phony; otherwise there must be some hidden cause for it which is not visible to you. Either it is phony or I have discovered something which I am not telling you, which I am hiding from you.
Even Ananda, Buddha’s closest disciple, asked the question one day when they were walking through a forest. It was autumn and the leaves were falling from the trees. The whole forest was full of dry leaves and the wind was blowing them about and there was a great sound of the leaves moving here and there. As they were passing through the forest, Ananda asked Buddha, “Bhagwan, one question persists. I have been repressing it, but I cannot repress it anymore. And today we are alone; the other followers have been left behind so nobody will know that I have asked you. I don’t want to ask it in front of the others. My question is: Are you telling us all that you have discovered or are you still hiding something? Because what you are telling us does not clarify your bliss, your peace. It seems you are hiding something.”
Buddha laughed and he showed a fist to Ananda and asked, “Ananda, do you see what this is?”
Ananda replied, “Yes, I can see it is a fist – your hand is closed.”
Buddha said, “A buddha is never like a fist.” He opened his hand and he said, “A buddha is like an open hand – he hides nothing. There is nothing to hide! I have said everything, I am absolutely open.”
Ananda still insisted, “But we cannot explain your constant bliss – and I have been watching you day in, day out. In the day you are blissful, in the night when you go to sleep you are blissful. Your face seems so innocent even in sleep. Even in sleep you look so peaceful, so serene, tranquil, calm, as if not a dream is passing within you. You are always a still pool with no ripples. How is it possible? I have also tried, but I do only a little bit and then I feel tired.”
If you are trying you will feel tired. Prabhu Maya, if you try to wear a smile you will feel tired because wearing a smile means making a great effort. You have to practice it like Jimmy Carter… Then it is not a smile at all. Your mouth is simply open, your teeth are simply showing, that’s all.

I have heard that his wife has to close his mouth every night because once a rat went in his open mouth. She phoned the doctor and he said, “I am coming, but it will take time. Meanwhile hang some cheese in front of his mouth.”
When the doctor came he was very surprised as she was hanging up another rat. He said, “What are you doing? I told you to hang cheese in front of his mouth!”
She said, “That’s right, but a cat came in behind the rat, so first the cat had to be taken out!”
Since then she has to forcibly close his mouth every night. It is dangerous! And the White House is an old building – it has many rats. In fact, who lives in the White House except rats? Who is interested in living in the White House? And because rats live there, cats also live there.

Meditation has no goal. It has no desire to attain anything. The dropping of the achieving mind is what meditation is all about. The understanding of desire and of the constant ambition for goals, for achievement, for ambition, brings you to a point – a point of tremendous awareness. You can see clearly that all goals are false; that you need not go anywhere; that you need not attain anything to be blissful; that to be blissful is your nature. You are missing it because you are running here and there, and in that running, in that hustle and bustle, you go on forgetting yourself.
Stop running here and there and discover yourself. The discovery of yourself is not a goal. How can it be a goal? A goal needs a distance between you and itself. The discovery of yourself is not a goal because you are already it! All that is needed is that you stop running here and there; sit silently, relax, and rest. Let the mind become calm and cool. When the mind is no longer running toward the past and toward the future; when all running has disappeared; when there is no mind as such; when you are simply there doing nothing, just being – this is meditation. Suddenly you know who you are. Suddenly you are inundated with bliss, overwhelmed by light, by eternity. Your life becomes a natural phenomenon. You needn’t wear smiles – a smile becomes natural. You needn’t pretend to be happy.
Only an unhappy person pretends to be happy. A happy person has even no idea that he is happy, he is simply happy. Others may think that he is happy; he has no idea. He is simply just being himself.
Yoka says:
Those who understand always act naturally.
Out of his understanding his actions are natural – his laughter is natural, his smile is natural, his whole life is natural. Your whole life is artificial, arbitrary. You are always trying to do something which is not really there. You are trying to love. Now, trying to love is to start from the very beginning in a wrong way. You are trying to be happy. How can you be happy? It is not a question of trying. You are making all kinds of efforts to be graceful. Now, grace is not an effort; if there is effort, there is no grace. Grace is an effortless beauty. The really graceful person knows no effort.
Yoka says:
Those who understand always act naturally. Most men live in impermanence, the unreal, but the man of Zen lives in the real.
You live in the phony, in the unreal. When you come across a man of Zen – remember the man of Zen means the man of meditation – there is a problem for you. Never try to understand the man of Zen according to your ideas; they are irrelevant. You can understand the man of Zen only through meditation. Learn the art of meditation, of being here and now – not for peace, not for bliss, not for anything. Effort without a goal… That’s what meditation is: effort without a goal.
Now, you only know effort when there is a goal. Otherwise you will ask, “This is illogical – effort without goal? Then why should we make an effort?” You have been making efforts for goals and what have you attained? It is time to try something else. Enough is enough.
Yoka says:
Effort without goal is quite different.
Quite different from all that you have done up to now.
It opens the door of truth which leads to the garden of Tathagata.
The word tathagata comes from the same word I used just a few moments ago: tathata. Buddha says, “I am peaceful because this is my suchness, my tathata.” Ask him anything and he always says, “This is my nature, my tathata.” Slowly, slowly it became known to his disciples that tathata is his most important word, his key word. Hence he is called Tathagata: one who lives in suchness; one who lives now and knows no other time; one who lives here and knows no other space.
If you can also be here and now:
It opens the door of truth which leads to the garden of Tathagata. A true man of Zen ignores the branches and the leaves, and aims for the root.
What is the root of your misery? – this goal-oriented mind. What is the root of your misery? – this constant escape into goals. What is the root of your misery? – your mind is the root of your misery. But you never cut the root; you go on pruning the branches, you go on pruning the leaves. And remember, the more you prune the leaves and the branches, the thicker will be the foliage; the tree will become stronger.
I have initiated more than one hundred thousand sannyasins and I have been teaching meditation for twenty years to millions of people, but not a single person has come with a root question to ask. They all come with “How to cut this branch?” and “How to cut this leaf?” Somebody says, “I am suffering from anger. What should I do with it?” Somebody else says, “I am suffering from too much greed. What should I do about it? How can I drop greed?” Somebody is suffering from jealousy and somebody is suffering from something else – and these are all branches and leaves. Nobody comes and says, “I am suffering from my mind. How should I get rid of it?” That is the root question.
The day you see the root, things are very easy. Cut the root and the whole thing withers away of its own accord. Anger, greed, sexuality, jealousy, possessiveness – everything disappears.
But you don’t want to cut the root. You are living a very paradoxical life. You go on watering the root; you go on training and refining your mind; you go on making your mind more informed, more nourished. And on the other hand you go on trying… That there should be less anger, less ambition, less greed, less ego. You ask, “How to be humble?” And you go on pouring water and giving fertilizer to the roots and cutting the leaves. You cut one leaf and three leaves will come in its place. The tree immediately accepts your challenge and instead of one it brings three leaves.
Hence, a society that has been against sex becomes morbid and sexually obsessed. It has happened in India. You will not find such a sex-obsessed country anywhere else. For the simple reason that they have been cutting the leaf again and again. They are constantly cutting that leaf and the tree goes on growing more leaves. So sexuality has penetrated in such subtle ways that unless you are very alert you will not be able to see how it has penetrated in different ways. And how the Indian mind has become more sexual than anybody else’s.
Do you know that India was the first country to think about sexual postures? The Kama Sutra was written in India – the first treatise on sexology. Sigmund Freud came after five thousand years. Masters and Johnson, and other researchers into sex, are just breaking ground in the West. They have not yet the sophistication which Vatsyayana’s Kama Sutra has – even the French are not as sophisticated. Vatsyayana has discovered almost everything about sex, nothing is left. His treatise is almost complete. It is a “how to” book; it gives you all the techniques.
Why did India discover the Kama Sutra? The country which has been celebrating celibacy for centuries, which has been teaching and preaching celibacy – this country discovers the Kama Sutra. This country gives birth to a man like Vatsyayana. And then came Pandit Koka, another Vatsyayana. Now, modern pornography is nothing compared to Koka. Modern pornography is very ordinary. Pandit Koka is a perfect pornographer.
But why were these people born in India? And thousands of temples are devoted to the shivalinga; that is a phallic symbol. No other country worships phallic symbols except India. It is both: it represents both man and woman. If you go to a Shiva temple, observe well. It represents the feminine sexual organ, it represents the masculine sexual organ. It represents them in a state of meeting, in a state of orgasm. And this is worshipped.
People have completely forgotten what they are worshipping. If you look into Indian scriptures you will be surprised. You will find them so obsessed with sex. On the one hand continuously condemning and on the other hand continuously, in subtle ways, depicting it. No other country has temples like Khajuraho, Konarak, Puri. Why? Why did this have to happen in India? – for the simple reason that if you cut one leaf, three arrive. Cut three and nine leaves arrive. Cut nine – remember – twenty-seven leaves will arrive. Nature believes in the magic number three. It believes in trinity.
This is not the way to transform a man; this is a way to deform humanity. So on the surface the Indian tries to show that he is not interested in sex at all and deep down he is boiling with sexuality, he is constantly looking for sexuality. His whole mind is full of sexuality. If we could make windows in the heads of people, Indian heads would be really worth seeing.
This was bound to happen. Whatever you repress, whatever you cut, if it is not cut at the roots, is bound to grow, is bound to grow in subtle ways. It may start asserting itself in morbid and perverted ways.
Yoka says:
A true man of Zen ignores the branches and the leaves, and aims for the root. Like the image of the moon reflected in a jade bowl I know the true beauty of the jewel of freedom. For myself and for others.
There is only one freedom: the freedom from all goals.
Don’t ask me what the goal of meditation is. Try to understand why you are constantly hankering for goals. In that very understanding meditation will arise in you, meditation will flower in you.
Meditation is not something that you can enforce, that you can practice. It is something very mysterious, tremendously vast. It comes only when your heart opens its doors to understand everything with no prejudice, with no a priori conclusions.
Being here with me, learn to be without goals. My sannyasins have to know perfectly well that we are not working for any goal at all. Our whole point is to live in the present moment so totally that all past and all future disappear.
Who cares about that which is already gone? Who cares about that which has not yet come? The moment is enough unto itself. And that is the way of meditation: the moment is enough unto itself. Living the moment in its totality, in joy; diving deep into it without holding anything back, is bliss. Getting rid of all goals – worldly and otherworldly, material and spiritual – one knows the taste of meditation. It is the taste of absolute freedom.

The second question:
Osho,
Why does everyone here understand you in his own way?
It is just natural – tathata. How can it be otherwise? Everybody has to understand me in his own way because everybody has a mind – and right now the understanding is happening through the mind. When mind disappears of course then everybody will understand in my way. Then there will be no problem, there will be no question. There will be no need for me to say anything – I will be sitting in silence, you will be sitting in silence, and we will enjoy silence. There will be communion, a heart-to-heart communion.
But right now you have minds and there is no other way for me to communicate with you. One has to accept this: when you are communicating with minds you have to accept that they will understand differently, they will understand in their own way.
Each mind is different. And here we have all kinds of minds – this is not a community of people from one certain society.
If just Hindus were here they would understand or misunderstand in the same way. But here there are Hindus and Mohammedans, Jainas, Buddhists, Christians, Jews, Zarathustrians – they all have their own religious backgrounds and all kinds of political ideologies. We have people from all the nations of the world; nearabout forty nations are represented here. How can you expect…? This is not a Catholic church, this is not a Hindu temple; this is a miniature universe. In fact, it is a miracle that some understanding is happening, that people are not cutting each other’s throats and are being very friendly and loving.
These are the people who have been cutting each other’s throats for centuries. Hindus killing Mohammedans, Mohammedans killing Hindus. And here you will see the miracle – you will find a man called Krishna Mohammed. You cannot find this anywhere else in the world. Krishna Mohammed?
In fact, I am very worried. When I die and I go to the other world then all these people – Krishna, Moses, Mohammed, Mahavira, Buddha – they will jump on me. They will say, “What have you been doing? Calling a man Krishna Mohammed?” Because I have heard that even in heaven they have compartments. Hindus live in one compartment, the Hindu colony. Mohammedans live in another compartment and they don’t see each other face-to-face. In fact, everybody believes he is in heaven and that nobody else is in heaven. God has to maintain that illusion, otherwise they will be creating trouble for God. So big walls surround those sections.
Now God is also going to be in trouble. Where will he put Krishna Mohammed – in the Hindu section or in the Mohammedan section? Our people will be flying all over the place.
It is natural that people should understand differently – people have different minds.

Julius: “How many Commandments are there?”
Julia: “Ten.”
Julius: “What would happen if you er… Well, you know, if you broke one of them?”
Julia: “So, there’d be nine!”

On Mother’s Day, her husband presented her with a beautiful skunk coat.
“I can’t see how such a beautiful coat comes from such a foul-smelling beast,” said the mother.
“I don’t ask for thanks, dear,” replied the husband, “but I do demand respect.”

An Italian calls Alitalia’s office and is answered by the office boy.
“Please, sir, is-a that-a the Alitalia office?”
“Yes,” answers the boy.
“Can you tell-a me how long-a it takes from Roma to Pune?”
“Just a minute, sir.”
“Thank-a-you!” answers the Italian and hangs up.

“Have you ever been bedridden?” the new doctor asked Mrs. Longo.
“Sure I have. And I’ve been screwed lots-a other ways, too,” the lady said proudly.

“What do you want for your birthday, son?” the indulgent Italian father asked his kid.
“I want-a watch,” the kid said.
Shrugged the father, “If it’s all right with your mother, it’s okay by me.”

During an official ceremony in a European country, the Brazilian ambassador is in a carriage with the Queen of England when suddenly the horse farts noisily.
Very embarrassed, the Queen apologizes, “I’m very sorry, Ambassador.”
“It was nothing, Your Majesty, it happens. Mind you, I even thought it was the horse!”

The third question:
Osho,
What is courage?
There is only one courage and that is the courage to go on dying to the past; not to collect it, not to accumulate it, not to cling to it. We all cling to the past, and because we cling to the past we become unavailable to the present. There are reasons – valid reasons – for the mind to cling to the past.
First: mind itself is the past. Just look at your mind – what it is. It is nothing but the past: all that you have read, listened to, experienced, observed, all that has been. Mind never is; it consists of the past tense. So naturally mind feeds on the past, it clings to the past because that gives it strength, power, energy, life. But the more the past accumulates around you, the more you become like a mirror covered with layers of dust. And of course, the past is comfortable. It feels cozy because you are well-acquainted with it. You know it perfectly well, so you know how to deal with it. You are skillful with it, you are artful with it; your whole intelligence depends on it. To drop it will mean that you will have to learn again and again. And that is inconvenient, uncomfortable.
To drop the past will mean that you have to become a child every day, and your ego wants to be an adult not a child. Your ego wants to pile up the past and sit upon it so that it looks higher than others. Without the past you will always remain a child with no knowledge, but full of wonder, of awe.
That is the only courage: to drop the known and to move into the unknown. It has not to be done only once, it has to be done every moment. It is not a question that once done it is done forever, you have to do it every moment, every day, till the very last moment of your life when you are dying on your bed. Then too you have to continue the process of dying to the past so that you can live each moment with pristine clarity, with no dust on your mirror. When you can reflect the present as it is, you know what God is, what godliness is. Godliness is another name for what is, for that which is.
But you are collecting information about it and that is one of the greatest barriers. Hence I have heard of sinners reaching, but I have never heard of scholars ever reaching to godliness. Pundits are the most impossible people. The more they know, the farther away they are from godliness. So many scriptures are preventing them. They cannot reach existence and existence cannot reach them. They are absolutely closed in their knowledge.
Courage means: courage to drop knowledge, courage to be innocent again, courage to function from a state of not-knowing. I don’t know of any other courage.
When I use the word courage I don’t mean the courage of a soldier. That is just stupidity, that is not courage. That is just stubbornness, that is not courage. That is just forced. You have to train the soldier so that he becomes dull. It is unintelligence, not intelligence. Hence soldiers become unintelligent people. The more medals they have, you can be certain, the more unintelligent they are. Just count the medals on their chest and you know how foolish they are.
The whole process of the army is to destroy intelligence because an intelligent person will not be able to kill. An intelligent person will ask a thousand and one questions before killing somebody for no reason at all. An Indian killing a Pakistani whom he has never met before, whom he has never seen before, with whom there is no enmity; a Pakistani killing an Indian for no reason at all, who has not done any harm to him…
If they were a little bit intelligent, would they be able to do it? Would the Indian or the Pakistani be able to do it without thinking of this man’s wife who is waiting at home, just as his wife is waiting at home for him; his small children are waiting, just as his small children are waiting for him; his old mother and his old father who depend on him, just as his mother and his father depend on him? Would he be able to do this stupidity of killing or being killed?
If soldiers are allowed to be intelligent, wars will disappear from the earth. Wars exist only if soldiers are made in such a way, conditioned in such a way that they lose all intelligence. That’s why for years unintelligent training has to be forced on them. Now, for years the soldier goes on doing things which make no sense. Early in the morning he gets up, he has to line up and the parade begins. “Left turn,” and “right turn,” “about turn,” “go forward,” and “go backward.” For what? And for hours after hours.

A philosopher was recruited in the Second World War. When the commanding officer said, “Right turn!” everybody turned right except the philosopher. The commanding officer asked, “Why? Why are you not turning right?”
He said, “Why should I turn? I have no business there; I don’t see the need. I think all these people are fools. You just say ‘Right turn’ and they have turned. You will have to prove to me what the purpose of it is. Why should I turn right?”
The commanding officer knew that he was a famous philosopher. He said, “This man is not right for the military. This type of person is not needed.” Even the other soldiers started thinking, “That’s right! Why? We are certainly fools. This man just says, ‘Right turn!’ and he has no answer for it and we turned right!”
The commanding officer thought, “This man will create trouble. Not only will he be trouble for me, even the others will start getting ideas from him.” He took him out and said, “This is not for you. Come into the kitchen. I will give you some other job, some simple job which will be good.” So he gave him a pile of potatoes and said to him, “Just sort them out – bigger ones on one side, smaller ones on the other.”
When he came back after an hour the philosopher was sitting silently, just in zazen – sitting silently, doing nothing. He had not even touched a single potato. The commanding officer said, “Can’t you even do that?”
He said, “I can do it, but there is a great problem. Yes, there are a few potatoes which are big and a few which are small, but a few that are in between. First it has to be settled where those in between ones go. Unless everything is clear I never take any step. What about the middle-class potatoes?”

He had to be freed. This man was not for the army. In fact, no intelligent man is for the army. Parading six hours a day, turning right, turning left, being ordered to do stupid things and following those orders… Then one day the commanding officer says, “Shoot!” and they just function like machines. Just as they were turning left and right they shoot, without a single thought of what they are doing – destroying life.
A sannyasin needs a totally different kind of courage. This is not courage, this is simply dullness, stupidity – thickness of the head and nothing else. Their intelligence has been completely destroyed, they have been conditioned to be robots. That’s why all army races prove to be very unintelligent.
In India the Punjabis, particularly the Sikhs, the sirdars, are the most warlike people, and the most unintelligent people too. Very courageous because where an intelligent person will think twice, they will rush in; they will not bother. You just order them and they will go into the fire. For centuries, this type of courage has been taught to humanity. This is a wrong type of courage. When I use the word courage, I am using it with a totally different connotation, a different meaning.
Courage to me means courage to be intelligent against this unintelligent crowd that surrounds you. Courage means fearlessness. Society will try in every way to force you according to its ideas. It is better to suffer than to compromise because through suffering your soul will be born. Through compromise you may save your skin, but your soul will be lost.
Courage means to be an individual; not to be a sheep, but to be a lion. Courage means the capacity to assert: “I am myself and my life is my life, and I am going to live it in my way. I am not here to live according to others and I won’t allow anybody to dictate to me how I should live, what I should do. I will live according to my light whatever the cost, even if I go astray.” It is better to go to hell by your own decision than to go to heaven by somebody else’s order because then heaven will be just slavery.
Courage means the courage to be free. Courage means freedom. If you reduce it to the essential core, it is in fact dying to the past. If you die to the past you die to the tradition you are born in; you die to the religion you are born in; you die to the society you are born in; you die to the whole past. You die to history and time, and you are born anew – a new human being who belongs to no race, to no country, to no religion, but who belongs to existence. A religious person but not a Christian, not a Hindu, not a Mohammedan.

The fourth question:
Osho,
What is your English – British or American?
It is certainly not British. To be British is not easy. One has to be born British at least seven times. It takes a very long time to be British. It is not American either because I am not a tourist. You know I don’t even leave my room – what kind of American can I be?
Why should my English be British or American? My English is my English – Osho English! This is a democratic country and the constitution declares freedom of speech as one of the fundamental rights. I speak my own language. Why should I speak American or English? In fact, English is too uptight, it is too tense, and American has become too lousy – just the opposite; it is a reaction.

“Mine American-born daughter she’s telling me: ‘Yeah, Popsi-wopsi, I gotcha, but you’ll hafta lay some heavy bread on me so’s I kin strut new threads at the establishment bust-out, ya dig?’
“So I am digging for maybe a half hour to learn she needs money so she can have a new dress by the school dance… And she is criticizing mine dialect!” her father was saying to me.

Now it is very difficult for me to understand…

“Yeah, Popsi-wopsi, I gotcha, but you’ll hafta lay some heavy bread on me so’s I kin strut new threads at the establishment bust-out, ya dig?”

I don’t dig it at all. And why should I dig? I have never done such a job in my whole life.
So I simply speak whatever way comes to me, whatever way comes spontaneously to me. You will have to be a little patient with me.

The fifth question:
Osho,
Have you completely forgotten us poor Australians?
I have not forgotten. I am collecting jokes about the Australians. Everybody is welcome to send me jokes about Australians. I have only one.

A man walked into a London pub and ordered twelve pints of bitter. He put them on a tray, took them outside to a car and passed them through the window. Later he brought back the empty glasses, bought another round and passed them into the car.
Curious, the bartender went outside with the next round and looking into the car, saw twelve midgets carousing and drinking beer.
“Who are they?” he asked.
“Oh,” said the man, “they’re just Australians with all the bullshit knocked out of them.”

The sixth question:
Osho,
You always talk about masters – and all of them are men. Does that mean that a woman can't become a master?
No, that doesn’t mean that a woman cannot become a master; many women have become masters. But then there is a problem. The problem is: unless a man becomes a master he is not allowed to speak by the wife. And he has not been a master for thousands of lives, so when he becomes a master he starts speaking. And when a woman becomes a master she becomes silent – she is tired. For thousands of lives she has been speaking and speaking and speaking; she has done enough speaking, so she becomes silent.
Now it is very difficult – how to know about silent masters? Unless you speak nobody will know about you. If Buddha had not spoken, if there had not been any Dhammapada, then I would not have talked on his sutras.
A man takes revenge when he becomes a master. And, do you see that whenever there is a master, more women gather to hear him than men? In fact, the proportion is: in four, three are women, one is a man. That was the proportion with Buddha’s disciples and that was the proportion with Mahavira’s disciples. So he really takes revenge – so many women and he remembers all those wives… Many of them may have been his wives in past lives. Wives, mothers, daughters, sisters – they have all tortured him. Now he says to himself, “Now it is my turn. Nobody can prevent me now.”
But women, by the time they become masters, have run out of gas.

The seventh question:
Osho,
Please, before I leave say something to me without words.
Okay.
Dig it? Get it? It is not difficult for me, it will be difficult for you.
But a little more…

The eighth question:
Osho,
How do they catch a lion in Russia?
Please don’t ask such difficult questions.
They arrest a cat and torture him until he admits he is a lion.

The ninth question:
Osho,
What is the secret of success?
You are asking me – a man who is an utter failure?
The secret of success is sincerity. Once you can fake that you’ve got it made.

The tenth question:
Osho,
What is the right Catholic Christian way to prevent a population explosion in the world?
You should go to the Vatican and ask the Polack. I’m not a Catholic, I’m not a pope. You create trouble for me. But I can suggest… This is only a piece of advice: sow your wild oats on Saturday night, then on Sunday pray for crop failure.

And the last question:
Osho,
What is a blow job?
Muktananda, you fool! Now this question is just the right question from you. I always knew you would ask something really great. The moment I saw you I realized immediately that here is a great fool, hence the name Muktananda – although I didn’t explain it to you that way. I give a beautiful explanation just to be polite. Truth can be said only later on when you are ready.
For example, you know our great guard, Sant. Somebody has asked me, “Osho, why have you given him the name Sant?” In Hindi sant means saint; the English word saint comes from sant. But in Hindi we also have one beautiful expression: ant sant. Ant sant means, nonsense. So when I saw Sant for the first time, I said, “Here comes ant sant!” But ant I had to drop because just in the beginning that would have been too much. So I called him Sant. But now it can be said; there is no trouble.
Muktananda, I saw the fool in you immediately. But even I was not so sure that you would be a perfect fool. Otherwise I would have called you Paramahansa Muktananda. Paramahansa means perfect. Now you deserve to be called Paramahansa Muktananda.
Now, what kind of question is this?

“Drinks on the house,” the Italian said to the bartender. “I feel great – just had my first blow job.”
“What was it like?” the barkeep asked.
“Okay, I guess,” the wop said. “But it did taste kind-a funny.”

A brave young Irish Revolutionary comes to London to blow up a bus and burns his mouth on the exhaust pipe.

An Italian dwarf was very famous among his friends for the size of his prick. A sex-starved American female tourist heard about him and visited his home to offer him twenty dollars to see his massive member.
Luigino agreed and pulled down his zipper to display his pride and joy.
The American lady was awestruck at the sight and asked hesitantly, “Is it all right if I kiss it?”
“Please, Missus,” said the dwarf, “no more blow jobs. Ten years ago I was seven feet tall with a tiny prick. Just look at what all these blow jobs have done to me!”

Muktananda, never ask me such dangerous questions. You are expected to ask spiritual questions, esoteric questions, supramental questions – and you are asking such questions which no buddha had to answer before. And I don’t think anybody else in the future will have to answer them because I will finish them all!
Enough for today.